Environmental activists protested outside government offices in Belgrade on Saturday to try to stop lithium mining in western Serbia.

Last week, mining giant Rio Tinto suffered a setback in its plans to extract the metal -- a vital component in electric cars, laptops, and phone batteries.

Loznica town council voted to suspend a development plan that included the mining project after protests by environmentalists across the country.

For three consecutive weekends, thousands of protesters in Belgrade and other towns across the country blocked main roads and bridges to oppose Rio Tinto's plans in the lead-up to the vote.

The rallies were seen as the biggest challenge yet to Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić.

He has responded by saying more transparency is needed about Rio Tinto's operations, while asking the parliament to reconsider two recent law changes that would have made it easier for Rio Tinto to begin its operations near Loznica.

Protesters say any lithium mining could inflict lasting ecological damage to rivers and farmland in the region.

Environmental groups such as Friends of the Earth say lithium extraction can harm the soil and cause air contamination.

They say it also requires a lot of water -- around 500,000 gallons per tonne of lithium -- which is damaging in countries that also suffer from water scarcity, such as Peru.

In a press release from November 16th, the company said the project "has the potential (...) to position Rio Tinto as the largest source of lithium supply in Europe for at least the next 15 years."
Local authorities in western Serbia have suspended plans to operate a lithium mine after widespread environmental protests.

Mining giant Rio Tinto had been expected to start work in the near future, but a town council in Loznica voted to suspend a regional development plan that permitted the excavation of lithium.

The vote on Thursday came days after Serbia's parliament suspended two key laws that ecologists said would allow the mining company to start the project.

For three consecutive weekends, thousands of protesters in Belgrade blocked main roads and bridges to oppose Rio Tinto's plans.

The rallies were seen as the biggest challenge yet to Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić.

"Whether there will be a mine depends on people [in western Serbia] and the study on environmental impact assessment," said Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabić.
Although Rio Tinto said it would adhere to all the latest environmental protection standards, protesters said the lithium excavation could inflict lasting ecological damage to rivers and farmland in the region.

Now that the lithium mine plans are on hold, Vučić has said that Serbia will "have to speak in a different way to Rio Tinto and others".

Throughout its almost 150-year history, the multinational company has faced accusations of corruption, environmental degradation, and human rights abuses at its excavation sites.

Lithium, which is used in batteries for electric cars, is considered one of the most sought-after metals of the future as the world shifts to more renewable energy sources.

As Serbia faces an electricity shortage, Vučić has ignored European Union pleas for countries to reduce CO2 emissions and has even pledged to expand coal mining for power plants -- much to the frustration of environmentalists.
Serbia has moved a step closer to joining the European Union after opening talks on a series of environmental policies.

On Tuesday, Belgrade was permitted to begin discussions on climate change, energy, transport and trans-European infrastructure networks.

Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabić told reporters in Brussels that the move marks "a very important milestone for our European integration process".

But the EU has warned progress on its path to EU membership still depends on Serbia normalising relations with Kosovo.

Countries wanting to join the 27-member bloc must bring their laws and regulations in line with EU standards.

Hopefuls must achieve negotiations in 35 policy areas, from the free movement of workers to taxation, or agricultural and economic policy.

Serbia has now opened 22 negotiating policy areas since its membership talks began in 2014. Tuesday was also the first time Serbia has opened four "chapters" at once.
"Serbia is taking another very important step forward in joining the European Union," said EU Enlargement Commissioner Olivér Várhelyi.

But he added that relations with Kosovo -- Serbia's former territory -- and the rule of law "remain essential to the overall pace of accession talks".

"[It is] "crucial that Serbia continues to deliver results on the ground," Várhelyi said.

Serbia, supported by its allies Russia and China, has refused to recognise Kosovo's declaration of independence in 2008 -- as well as five current EU countries.
The European Union has pledged €9 billion for the Western Balkans as part of a new economic and investment plan but political divisions over the prospect of accession remain entrenched.

The new commitment comes as European leaders met in Brdo pri Kranju, Slovenia, for an EU-Western Balkans summit that was also attended by the heads of government of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Kosovo.

As of today, Albania, North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia are officially recognised as candidates to EU membership, while Bosnia and Kosovo are seen as potential applicants. Albania and North Macedonia are the most advanced of the group, but a dispute between Skopje and the current Bulgarian government has effectively blocked the process. The impasse has shed further light on the slow pace of EU accession.

Mindful that patience is wearing thin in the Balkans, Slovenia, the current holder of the EU's rotating presidency, convened the special summit in Brdo to directly address the question of enlargement. But not every member state shares Slovenia's appetite for welcoming new members in the 27-strong club.

The final communiqué of the high-level meeting simply reaffirms the EU's "unequivocal support for the European perspective of the Western Balkans" without any specific deadline or time limit, let alone any compromise from Bulgaria to break the deadlock.

"The European Union is not complete without the Western Balkans," said Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, adding that the "vast majority" of EU countries expressed their support for enlargement, "even the most sceptical ones", which she did not name.

The failure to open negotiations with North Macedonia and Albania is "jeopardising our standing and leverage in the region," von der Leyen remarked.

Standing next to her, Charles Michel, President of the European Council, underlined the strategic importance of the Western Balkans and the clear consensus around the leaders' table.

Both presidents, however, admitted that "key issues" like fundamental values, rule of law, justice, media freedom and the fight against corruption and organised crime remain roadblocks for accession. The leaders praised the reforms that the Balkan countries have so far undertaken in this regard but added the six nations still have work to do.

"In all frankness, there is an ongoing discussion among the 27 about our capacity to welcome new member states," said Michel.

In order to support reforms, EU leaders agreed to set up a new economic and investment plan for the Western Balkans to help the region improve its competitiveness and accelerate the green and digital transitions – in line with the EU's own agenda. The bloc has pledged €9 billion in grants, which Brussels says have the potential of mobilising up to €20 billion in investments.

The communiqué includes other commitments in the fields of climate action, connectivity, transport, market integration, research and innovation, as well as a roadmap to lower roaming charges between the EU and the Western Balkans.

The bloc also promises to provide the region with more anti-coronavirus vaccines, although without guaranteeing any specific number.

So far, the EU has delivered over 2.9 million shots and €3.3 billion in health and economic support against the pandemic.

Commitments to deepen cooperation are also made in the field of foreign policy and security, including disinformation, hybrid threats, migration, human trafficking, terrorism and radicalisation.

EU leaders expect the Western Balkans to "fully align" with its foreign policy positions and "act accordingly". The bloc is wary of the growing influence of Russia and China across the region, which many fear will grow as the prospect of accession languishes.

"We share the same history, the same interests and values," said von der Leyen. "I'm deeply convinced we also share the same destiny".

Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša, who hosted the summit, called the meeting a "milestone" and compared its significance to that of the 2003 Thessaloniki summit when the EU officially recognised the Western Balkans as potential candidates for EU membership.

The summit was preceded by an informal dinner where EU leaders had a chance to discuss a topic of greater importance and urgency for citizens: the soaring prices of electricity.

Countries like France, Italy and Spain are calling for decisive EU-wide solutions, like a common strategic gas reserve, but Brussels and Northern states are urging caution, preferring instead temporary and targeted measures at the national level.
There’s a lot of fanfare when EU leaders get together in Brussels. Whether the summits succeed or fall apart, they tend to take on legendary status and leave their mark on the history of the bloc.

But why do EU leaders hold summits, and how do they work?

What is the European Council?
The EU summit is a meeting of the European Council which is the group of leaders running countries that are members of the EU.

It's not to be confused with the Council of the European Union, which gathers national ministers and deals with legislation and policy matters.

The 27 heads of state and government meet up to six times per year to set the course of EU politics. They do not negotiate or adopt laws but instead set the policy agenda.

Since 2009, the person chairing the summits is the European Council president who sends out a formal invitation letter laying out the pressing problems of the bloc. The current president is former Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel.

The president then chairs the negotiations in order to adopt conclusions. This is the final statement agreed to by all 27 leaders.

In reality, most of the groundwork for an EU summit is done weeks ahead by civil servants and diplomats before the big names arrive in Brussels. In fact, draft conclusions are often leaked ahead of the summit.

Why does the EU hold summits?
In the 1950s when EU leaders wanted to discuss matters important to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), there was not a clear meeting calendar, and meetings were improvised.

The idea to have a club of EU leaders to talk shop on a regular basis was the brainchild of former French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing in 1974. The following year, EU leaders started meeting three times a year.
The reason for having a meeting of all leaders was to have a form of collective leadership. No matter the size of the member state, everyone had a seat at the table.

Nowadays, EU leaders meet at least twice every six months and the Council president can call special summits on a particularly urgent issue.

EU summits are needed to get agreement on issues that matter across all EU countries - be it the euro currency (fears of Grexit), a new trade partnership with a former EU country (Brexit) or how to deal with the fallout of a pandemic (COVID-19 recovery funds).

EU summits are generally the most critical in periods of crisis, which is why they can become somewhat tense and run into extra time.
Why do EU summits last so long?
EU summits have the reputation of starting at lunchtime and going well into the early hours of the next morning. This is because getting an agreement between the 27 leaders is not always easy.

"I think that European history is full of disagreements, negotiations and in the end, compromises," said the Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras in 2015 as the Greek debt crisis talks rumbled on. In the end, it was a Greek compromise that put an end to the spectre of Grexit, but it came with painful austerity measures.
Certain decisions require only consensus or qualified majority votes, but others require a unanimous agreement. This means just one country can veto the conclusions of 26 others.

In 2020, Poland and Hungary threatened to veto the bloc’s €1.8 trillion budget over concerns that a mechanism would make some funds conditional on a country's respect for core European values.

Fortunately, an 11th-hour deal was agreed with Warsaw and Budapest, averting a potential crisis.

Back in 2011, however, when Britain was still a member of the club, the then David Cameron government wielded its mighty veto on an EU-wide treaty change late into the night, much to the frustration of his peers.

The remaining 26 member states eventually went ahead without the Brits, with Prime Minister Cameron saying the agreement was not in the UK’s interests.

Longest EU summit ever
Other summits have legendary status simply for their sheer length.

In July 2020, a mammoth meeting went on in Brussels for over 80 hours between the Friday evening and early hours of Tuesday. The negotiations were over the same budget and coronavirus recovery fund that the Hungarians and Poles tried to block.
The Greek debt crisis had been hogging the headlines at EU summits for years when in 2015, another tense EU summit was held amid the spectre of Grexit.

"We haven’t reached the point yet where I could say that we have an agreement, but I will work until the last minute, until the last second, until the last millisecond, in order to protect the euro-project from failing," said then-European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in June 2015.

By July, a referendum had been held in Greece rejecting the terms of the bailout. A week later, after 17 hours of negotiations in Brussels, Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras conceded to cuts and painful austerity measures.

But the top prize goes to the Nice summit in December 2000, where EU leaders talked for 90 hours. The resulting compromise was the Treaty of Nice - an attempt to reform EU institutions to allow for eastern expansion which would happen by 2004.

Clashing over cash
There have also been some fiery moments between leaders, especially when it comes to money.

In 1979, back when the EU was still the European Communities (EC), UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had sharp words for EC heads of state and government when arguing in favour of a British rebate, which would stop the UK from paying more into the collective budget than what it received in subsidies.

The most famous of these words were, "I want my money back", and they would not be the last time the Iron Lady clashed with her European counterparts, with the dispute over funds going on for five years, ending in a Thatcher victory.
Though the characters may change, the battles over money remain present.

As EU leaders were battling out a coronavirus recovery fund, the number of handouts and the respect of rule of law became major sticking points.

The so-called "Frugal Four" --Austria, Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands -- announced a counter-proposal, binning the idea of debt-pooling and long-term EU budget increases.

When leaders finally reached a deal after four days of talks, French President Emmanuel Macron hailed the deal as a "historic day for Europe".

Former German Chancellor Angela Merkel said "extraordinary events" required "extraordinary new methods," while Spain’s Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez likened the recovery package to Europe’s post-war Marshall Plan.

However, Hungary and Poland remained unhappy with the terms of the deal, eventually seeking guidance from the European Court of Justice on the legal issue of tying EU funds to values.

"The sign of a successful European compromise is that no one loves it," said Rebecca Christie, a visiting fellow at the Brussels-based think tank Bruegel, of the deal in July 2020.

While the summits are often written up in headlines as epic battles between national leaders with winners and losers, they normally come down to compromise.

Every weekday, Uncovering Europe brings you a European story that goes beyond the headlines. Download the Euronews app to get a daily alert for this and other breaking news notifications. It's available on Apple and Android devices.
This week was a packed one in the European bubble.

In the last complete week before the Christmas holidays, the European Parliament, the European Council and the European Commission had a full agenda.

Omicron coordination
The week ended with an intense summit that showed the divisions between members states on omicron even as member states called for coordination.

Italy, Greece, Portugal and Ireland are now acting on their own and introducing extra measures like PCR tests for vaccinated Europeans. The fear is that the EU COVID travel pass for citizens will soon be obsolete.

Italy's PM Mario Draghi has insisted on the need for these new measures, but not all members states agree. Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez praised the certificate and said it continued to have his full support.

The prime ministers and heads of state are not the only ones who want to avoid travelling conflict just before Christmas.

The leader of the European People's Party Manfred Weber also defended the certificate.

"Even with growing numbers with Omicron now, with rising cases of COVID cases, we have to guarantee the freedom of movement with open borders inside the European Union. That is why we have to modernise and upgrade the COVID pass," he said.

All eyes on Russia
In addition to tough talks about the virus, EU leaders had another problem on their hands as they met this week in Brussels. Once again, Russia played a central part in their talks.

Leaders are concerned about a recent US intelligence report that 175,000 Russian troops are gathering on the border of Ukraine.

"Probably we face the most dangerous situation in the last 30 years. We have to do everything in our hands to prevent the worst-case scenario," said Lithuanian President Gitanas Nauseda ahead of the summit.

Ukraine wants the EU to act prior to a feared Russian incursion but this is not a move they are willing to make. Instead they have made a series of threats.

"If there is military aggression against Ukraine, the consequences will be huge," said Council President Charles Michel.

Navalny's Sakharov
Meanwhile in Strasbourg this week, MEPs gave a prestigious prize to Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny. The 45-year-old Russian activist sits behind bars in Russia after violating his probation.

It was his daughter Nadia who collected the Sakharov prize in his honour and didn't mince words when she accepted it.

"We strive for a Europe of ideas, the celebration of human rights, democracy and integrity and we don’t want a Europe of chancellors or ministers who dream of getting a job on the board of Putin’s state-owned companies or sailing on oligarchs’ yachts," she said.
There’s a lot of fanfare when EU leaders get together in Brussels. Whether the summits succeed or fall apart, they tend to take on legendary status and leave their mark on the history of the bloc.

But why do EU leaders hold summits, and how do they work?

What is the European Council?
The EU summit is a meeting of the European Council which is the group of leaders running countries that are members of the EU.

It's not to be confused with the Council of the European Union, which gathers national ministers and deals with legislation and policy matters.

The 27 heads of state and government meet up to six times per year to set the course of EU politics. They do not negotiate or adopt laws but instead set the policy agenda.

Since 2009, the person chairing the summits is the European Council president who sends out a formal invitation letter laying out the pressing problems of the bloc. The current president is former Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel.

The president then chairs the negotiations in order to adopt conclusions. This is the final statement agreed to by all 27 leaders.

In reality, most of the groundwork for an EU summit is done weeks ahead by civil servants and diplomats before the big names arrive in Brussels. In fact, draft conclusions are often leaked ahead of the summit.

Why does the EU hold summits?
In the 1950s when EU leaders wanted to discuss matters important to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), there was not a clear meeting calendar, and meetings were improvised.

The idea to have a club of EU leaders to talk shop on a regular basis was the brainchild of former French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing in 1974. The following year, EU leaders started meeting three times a year.
The reason for having a meeting of all leaders was to have a form of collective leadership. No matter the size of the member state, everyone had a seat at the table.

Nowadays, EU leaders meet at least twice every six months and the Council president can call special summits on a particularly urgent issue.

EU summits are needed to get agreement on issues that matter across all EU countries - be it the euro currency (fears of Grexit), a new trade partnership with a former EU country (Brexit) or how to deal with the fallout of a pandemic (COVID-19 recovery funds).

EU summits are generally the most critical in periods of crisis, which is why they can become somewhat tense and run into extra time.
Why do EU summits last so long?
EU summits have the reputation of starting at lunchtime and going well into the early hours of the next morning. This is because getting an agreement between the 27 leaders is not always easy.

"I think that European history is full of disagreements, negotiations and in the end, compromises," said the Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras in 2015 as the Greek debt crisis talks rumbled on. In the end, it was a Greek compromise that put an end to the spectre of Grexit, but it came with painful austerity measures.
Certain decisions require only consensus or qualified majority votes, but others require a unanimous agreement. This means just one country can veto the conclusions of 26 others.

In 2020, Poland and Hungary threatened to veto the bloc’s €1.8 trillion budget over concerns that a mechanism would make some funds conditional on a country's respect for core European values.

Fortunately, an 11th-hour deal was agreed with Warsaw and Budapest, averting a potential crisis.

Back in 2011, however, when Britain was still a member of the club, the then David Cameron government wielded its mighty veto on an EU-wide treaty change late into the night, much to the frustration of his peers.

The remaining 26 member states eventually went ahead without the Brits, with Prime Minister Cameron saying the agreement was not in the UK’s interests.

Longest EU summit ever
Other summits have legendary status simply for their sheer length.

In July 2020, a mammoth meeting went on in Brussels for over 80 hours between the Friday evening and early hours of Tuesday. The negotiations were over the same budget and coronavirus recovery fund that the Hungarians and Poles tried to block.
The Greek debt crisis had been hogging the headlines at EU summits for years when in 2015, another tense EU summit was held amid the spectre of Grexit.

"We haven’t reached the point yet where I could say that we have an agreement, but I will work until the last minute, until the last second, until the last millisecond, in order to protect the euro-project from failing," said then-European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in June 2015.

By July, a referendum had been held in Greece rejecting the terms of the bailout. A week later, after 17 hours of negotiations in Brussels, Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras conceded to cuts and painful austerity measures.

But the top prize goes to the Nice summit in December 2000, where EU leaders talked for 90 hours. The resulting compromise was the Treaty of Nice - an attempt to reform EU institutions to allow for eastern expansion which would happen by 2004.

Clashing over cash
There have also been some fiery moments between leaders, especially when it comes to money.

In 1979, back when the EU was still the European Communities (EC), UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had sharp words for EC heads of state and government when arguing in favour of a British rebate, which would stop the UK from paying more into the collective budget than what it received in subsidies.

The most famous of these words were, "I want my money back", and they would not be the last time the Iron Lady clashed with her European counterparts, with the dispute over funds going on for five years, ending in a Thatcher victory.
Though the characters may change, the battles over money remain present.

As EU leaders were battling out a coronavirus recovery fund, the number of handouts and the respect of rule of law became major sticking points.

The so-called "Frugal Four" --Austria, Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands -- announced a counter-proposal, binning the idea of debt-pooling and long-term EU budget increases.

When leaders finally reached a deal after four days of talks, French President Emmanuel Macron hailed the deal as a "historic day for Europe".

Former German Chancellor Angela Merkel said "extraordinary events" required "extraordinary new methods," while Spain’s Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez likened the recovery package to Europe’s post-war Marshall Plan.

However, Hungary and Poland remained unhappy with the terms of the deal, eventually seeking guidance from the European Court of Justice on the legal issue of tying EU funds to values.

"The sign of a successful European compromise is that no one loves it," said Rebecca Christie, a visiting fellow at the Brussels-based think tank Bruegel, of the deal in July 2020.

While the summits are often written up in headlines as epic battles between national leaders with winners and losers, they normally come down to compromise.

Every weekday, Uncovering Europe brings you a European story that goes beyond the headlines. Download the Euronews app to get a daily alert for this and other breaking news notifications. It's available on Apple and Android devices.
The German government has injected 60 billion euros into fighting the climate crisis.

The investment is part of a new supplementary budget to "supercharge" the country's climate and transformation fund and encourage a shift towards a green economy, say officials.

The budget, passed unanimously by Chancellor Olaf Scholz's cabinet, will channel billions of euros of unused debt in this year's federal budget into future green spending.

The manoeuvre was agreed last month by the centre-left Social Democrats (SPD), pro-spending Greens and fiscally more cautious Free Democrats (FDP) in their coalition deal. It allows the parties to make the most of a temporary, pandemic-related suspension of borrowing limits.
The coalition wants to deploy the funds to make critical public investments in climate protection measures - from charging points for electric vehicles to better insulating homes - and the digitalisation of the economy.

In addition to the debt-financed 60 billion euros, the government will channel some 18 billion euros of tax revenue, mainly stemming from eco taxes and the CO2 emission trading scheme, into its climate and transformation fund next year.
Over 100 puffins have been found dead on the northeast coast of Scotland, Shetland and Orkney.

The birds, nicknamed ‘sea parrots’ because of their colourful beaks, have been washing up over the past three weeks. It’s one of the biggest mass die-offs discovered in this season for the past 50 years.

The cases are being closely tracked by the UK Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (UKCEH), which carries out long-term monitoring of seabird populations, to record the effects of environmental change.

Some of the puffins washing up in Orkney are adult birds, which raises concerns that there will be a knock-on effect on breeding numbers next year.

"This is one of the most significant puffin ‘wrecks’ we’ve seen for this time of year since we began studying these fascinating seabirds almost 50 years ago," says Dr Francis Daunt, seabird ecologist at UKCEH.

"Many of the people who have found the birds say they are emaciated, which suggests there could be a problem within the marine food chain."
In the wild, puffins have an average lifespan of 25 years, with each adult pair mating for life. During the spring and summer breeding season, each couple lay just one egg on average. A puffin chick is called a ‘puffling’.

While Atlantic Puffins - the species found in the UK - are not endangered, their numbers are in decline. This is due to overfishing, which reduces their supply of small fish, such as herring and hake. Pollutants, such as oil spills, can also harm seabirds. Oil can coat their plumage, causing them to lose critical body heat.There are thought to be around 580,000 pairs of Atlantic Puffin currently living in the UK.

In September and October this year, thousands of guillemots and razorbills were also found dead along the east coast of the UK, but scientists don’t yet know if these occurrences are linked.

Hundreds of the birds were tested for avian flu, as the UK is currently experiencing its largest ever outbreak, but the tests came back negative.
"It is worrying to see puffins washing up dead and sick. We hope to be able to carry out post mortems on them as well," says Dr Daunt.

The investigation into the deaths of the razorbills and guillemots is now focusing on two possible causes: a significant failure of the marine food chain or toxic poisoning due to algal blooms, though it may be a combination of the two.
The failure of the marine food supply chain could be due to the unusually warm water temperature that occurred in early September 2021, a few weeks before the birds were discovered.

The final results of the study, which is a partnership between the UKCEH, the Marine Scotland directorate of the Scottish Government, Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Edinburgh University, Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Natural England and DEFRA will not be available until early next year.
What should you do if you see a dead puffin?
Anyone who spots a dead puffin should take a photograph of it, if it is safe to do so.

The photo should clearly show its beak and wings and can be sent to the UKCEH via enquiries@ceh.ac.uk. The public are advised not to touch any birds that they discover.

If you see any birds that are sick but alive, please contact the SSPCA or the RSPCA.
There's no point in me pretending I don't get Christmas and birthday presents for my dogs, because I absolutely do. From stockings filled with treats to wrapped-up toys, I utterly spoil my pets at every opportunity.

But these gifts aren't always the most eco-friendly options in the world, often containing excess plastic packaging or only lasting a few minutes. Every time one of my dogs tears a new toy to pieces, it feels wasteful when you consider the likely carbon footprint involved with making and distributing that product.

So for those of us so inclined as to gift to our pets, what are the most sustainable options around?
Animal Instincts 'snow leopard'
Bear with me on this one - I know it looks like it would be destroyed in a minute, but there's something magical about this toy.

When I adopted the elder of my dogs, back in 2017, this was the first toy we bought her. Three and a half years later, this leopard (named April, because not only am I the sort of person to buy presents for my pets, I also like to name their toys) is still going strong.

In fact, when my second - far more destructive - dog entered our lives earlier this year, he has managed to rip open every single toy within a 2km radius of our house, except April. We bought a smaller, identical version of the leopard (this time named Ann), which also remains undestroyed.

Both dogs adore these plushies, and I still can't explain why they have yet to be torn to pieces - but they are certainly more sustainable than the usual chew toys we buy.
Naturally shed 'deer antler chews'
If your dogs are chewers, there's nothing better than deer antlers. No animals are hurt in the process, as the chews are made from antlers which have been naturally shed by wild deer.

What you're left with is a 100 per cent natural product, which is healthy for pets - especially compared to the dangers of rawhide chews - and good for the planet.
A dapper neckerchief
If you want your pet to look extra chic this year, why not buy a handmade neckerchief from the team over at House of Klaus?

This small independent business makes beautiful accessories for pets at absurdly reasonable prices.

If you're based near Newcastle, UK you can catch them at Tynemouth market every Sunday, but for those of us a little further afield - you can also order via Facebook or Instagram.

Should you have a design in mind, there is the option to pay for a custom commission.

My favourite thing about these products (which have been thoroughly tried and tested by my two), is that the bandanas slip on over the collar, rather than tying around your pets' necks. This means it's a little more secure - and a whole lot safer - than conventional neckerchiefs.
The team over at Snooty Catz are accredited by Terracycle and Ecologi for their climate-positive approach to business.

They have numerous toys for dogs, from 'fetch and tug' ropes to Lenny the Leek...

Their loose leaf catnip is also a great, natural product to boost your cat's wellbeing and energy levels.
If you want to really spoil your pets, while also ensuring their safe return should they ever wander, nothing beats a Lady and the Hound tag.

You can order custom designs with different charms, or go for one of the many pre-designed options.

If you fancy matching - you can even get a human necklace for added adorableness.
Whatever you gift your pets this Christmas, make sure you monitor them closely throughout the festive period. It's common that animals end up eating things they shouldn't - like ornaments and chocolate - around Christmas time, so it pays to be vigilant.

But a deer antler and a new toy should be enough distraction to keep them happy well into the new year!
This Jack Russell Terrier, named Patch, is stepping out for some exercise and attention with a handler from the world-famous Battersea Dogs and Cats Home.

The four-year-old pup arrived at the London animal rescue centre earlier this month, after being found as a stray. He - and many others like him - are now hot property thanks to a surge in demand for rehoming pets during Britain's successive lockdowns.

In just one week last March, Battersea - which has three centres across London, Berkshire and Kent - rehomed 155 dogs and cats, the best single-week result in more than a decade. The home has received thousands of applications every week since then.

Chief executive Peter Laurie says the charity found a new home for almost every animal in its care that, as the pandemic ripped through the country and people from all walks of life sought company at home.

"When the pandemic started back in March last year, we saw extraordinary rehoming demand, we had queues of people desperate to adopt a dog or a cat," he says. "And we able to be rehome almost every animal in our care in the space of a couple of weeks, which was great."

But now all of that is beginning to change. Laurie says that Battersea is now starting to see so-called "pandemic pets" being given up again, as England lifts its latest COVID-19 lockdown.

"As people gradually return to offices," Laurie says, "they start thinking about taking holidays as well. I think, very sadly, we're going to see people returning their dogs and cats.

"A lot of people bought puppies very early on in the pandemic. Those puppies will have grown into adult dogs now. And some of those behaviours may be becoming a little bit more challenging now. People may be thinking now that it's getting too difficult. So sadly, I think we're going to see an upturn in relinquishment."

Earlier this month, the authorities in England allowed shops, gyms, hairdressers, restaurant patios and beer gardens to reopen after months of lockdown.

Indoor drinking and dining won't be allowed in England until May 17 at the earliest. Theatres, cinemas, nightclubs and most other venues remain closed, while indoor socialising is tightly restricted and foreign holidays remain banned.

A tail as old as time
The number of unwanted dogs and cats coming to Battersea has doubled in the last couple of months. Such an uptick is not unheard of; Battersea saw a significant increase in stray dogs across the UK during the last recession.

Cattery rehoming team leader Kate Collins recalls: "People have had to move home, and couldn't take their animal with them. Quite a few people have come to us and said that they can no longer keep their animals because of financial aspects, [such as] redundancies and job losses. It's been really unfortunate that they've had to give up their pet to us.

"But on the flip side, we do take in any animal that comes to us, dog or cat. And we do our best to make sure we can rehome them to a really lovely home."

Like all organisations, Battersea has had to adapt its working practices amid the pandemic. After the outbreak of coronavirus it closed its doors to visitors for the first time in its 160-year history and began delivering dogs and cats to people's homes instead. Meanwhile, its traditional physical introductions between would-be owner and pet were replaced with video calls.

"This past year we've obviously changed and adapted to a totally different way of rehoming," says Collins. "Before, we'd have customers coming up, meeting cats. Unfortunately, in lockdown we couldn't have that. So, what we've done is have a lot more of a remote rehoming in process."
One of the most populated cities in the US is preparing for what may now be inevitable: submersion. New York city has started a huge climate resiliency project to try and avoid the mistakes of the past and protect itself against the extreme weather of the future.

The economic hub of the US is highly vulnerable to climate change. With 836km of coastline, experts fear that sea levels will rise by 20-75 cm by 2050. This increase could put some New York underwater, particularly the island of Manhattan.
With a population of 8.5 million people, 2012's Hurricane Sandy and Storms Ida and Henri this summer caused billions of dollars of damage to America's largest city as well as over 50 deaths.

With its unique geographical position, the 'Big Apple' is extremely vulnerable to bad weather and has recently adopted a climate resilience plan costing $20 billion (€17.7 billion) to try and preempt future storms.
One of the projects is trying to protect the many residents of Manhattan. The East Side Coastal Resiliency Project aims to protect 110,000 New Yorkers on Manhattan’s East Side, from Montgomery Street up to East 25th Street.

As part of the $1.45 billion (€1.3 billion) project, work has started in southeast Manhattan to erect an integrated 4km system of raised parkland, floodwalls, berms and movable floodgates to create a continuous line of protection against sea-level rises and the growing threat of stronger, more severe coastal storms worsened by climate change.
"This project will keep New Yorkers safe from coastal storms and rising seas for decades to come, while also investing in amenities and improving access to public spaces on the East Side of Manhattan," says the Director of the Mayor’s Office of Climate Resiliency, Jainey Bavishi.

Manhattan will also be replanting thousands of trees around the construction site and improving underground systems for sewers.
‘Scottish smoked salmon’ - three words which are synonymous with Christmas for many people. In recent years, a fourth word 'sustainable' has often been added to the packaging, but is it deserving of this label?

The foodstuff has been marketed into a myth, conjuring up images of mist-soaked sea lochs and babbling burns. Scotland is still this beautiful of course, but the fish on your plate never did much leaping upstream.

If you’ve visited the Highlands and Islands and spotted a fish farm hovering on the loch’s surface, a kind of reverse spell is at work - the idea that these discrete circles are a sleek portal to another world: the supermarket.

The reality, as those who live up close know, is far messier, crueller, and can be dangerous.
It’s a reasonable instinct to want some salmon on your Christmas table. Like a satsuma in a stocking, a side of sprouts or a box of chocolates, a smoked salmon breakfast is one tradition passed down in many households across Europe.

But for such a clearly packaged export, do you really know where salmon comes from?
Marine biologist David Ainsley was taking a boat full of tourists round Loch Sunart on one of his wildlife trips two summers ago, when they noticed a colossal stink coming from a fish farm.

Steering the boat closer, he could see a barge with a JCB-like scoop on an arm - reaching into the open-net cage and scooping up mounds of dead fish.

An experienced diver, the 64-year-old decided to investigate what was really going on with the salmon. That night, he returned to the farm and - after "a game of cat and mouse" with the fish farm boat - jumped into the water.

"I’m not an emotional person, at all," he says, "but I came down and there were just hundreds of healthy-looking salmon gasping themselves to death on the side of the cages."

Gill disease was the problem here, and it was far from an isolated incident. Open-net cage farming means that whatever goes into the water - salmon faeces, nitrogen excreted through their gills, chemicals used to treat diseases - seeps into the whole marine ecosystem.
As the Scottish salmon industry grew into its current form - mostly owned by a few Norwegian companies - a rule called the ‘allowable zone of effect’ (AZE) loosened too, explains Ainsley.

This idea that only a limited area around the cages is affected by pollution has been disproven by a number of scientific studies over the years.
Sea lice are ectoparasites - feeding on the tissue and blood of host fish - and they’re a huge problem in salmon farming. The industry tackles it by chucking chemicals into the cages, but the lice have developed resistance over time, leading companies to use higher and higher quantities of insecticides like emamectin benzoate.

In 2016, a study by the Scottish Association for Marine Science (SAMS) found that emamectin was causing "substantial, widescale" reductions in crabs and lobsters. But it was published within a second report that rubbished its findings. It emerged that this take-down was written by reviewers with links to the US drug manufacturer Merck.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) knew about the company’s involvement, but was overruled by the government and salmon industry officials, The Sunday Herald reported. It’s one of many instances that have led campaigners to describe the regulator as "toothless". And emamectin is still being used in high quantities by fish farms.
Locals have also complained of "blinding headaches" caused by the heavy use of formaldehyde to treat salmon disease and parasites.

SEPA audited the Kames fish farm at Loch Tralaig and found no evidence that it had breached its license conditions with regard to formaldehyde.

A spokesperson for the regulator told Euronews Green, "The long-term trend has been for reduced reliance on medicine treatments and we’ll continue to work with the sector on innovation in containment, alternatives to medicine use and site relocation – with progress being made in each of these areas."
The industrial farming of salmon has hurt Scotland’s magnificent wildlife in various ways. Inshore sea lochs are important calving areas for porpoises, sheltered spots where dolphins used to travel too. Ainsley has seen less of the cetaceans in areas where acoustic deterrent devices (ADDs) were used by companies to drive away seals from the nets.

Wild salmon suffer too of course, especially when diseased populations escape and mingle with their highly-evolved kin. A half-a-million strong farm which came adrift during a storm last year, was "the ecological equivalent of an oil tanker running aground" for wild salmon, wrote campaigner Corin Smith.

"Scottish wildlife, under and above the water has been my life," says Ainsley, who started diving in 1976. "I’ve dived well over 4,000 dives through the time when we’ve done more damage to our seas than in the whole of history. And very few people have dived under fish farms. So I feel like the witness who’s seen a crime and feels responsible to do something about it."

Aitchison, who has filmed the likes of the BBC’s Planet Earth series, says that Atlantic salmon compares to the iconic wild animals he has seen all over the world.

Climate change is also impacting cold water fish like salmon, he explains, but it can’t be controlled quickly enough to protect the species. "We could control the impacts of sea lice and disease on wild salmon here. And we’re not doing it anywhere near as wholeheartedly as we should."
The good news is that a major recovery effort is underway in Scotland’s waters. Community-led charity Seawilding is one such group that has the country’s native species at heart. At Loch Craignish, Danny Renton and co have launched a project to reintroduce 1 million oysters - incredible ecosystem engineers that are able to clean almost 40 gallons of seawater a day.

The community are also planting fields of seagrass - you can even get involved from afar by gifting someone a square metre for £20 (€24).

Scotland doesn’t have a monopoly on dirty salmon farming. It’s been called the "battery-hen farming of the sea" as far away as Tasmania too.
Christmas traditions like Turkey and salmon meals put a huge amount of pressure on relatively few species, and can incentivise irresponsible farming. So broadening your fish options is a good place to start for pescetarians and carnivores. Sardines and mackerel have the oily taste we prize in salmon.

For vegetarians and vegans, there are plenty of alternatives that still put a pop of orange on the table.

Ribbons of brined carrot make a great topping with cream ‘cheese’ on bagels or blinis, and even watermelon can give the right texture after roasting.

"We want to leave something for the next generation - that's the whole meaning of sustainability," says Ainsley.