The Netherlands is back to a nationwide lockdown starting Sunday to curb the Omicron variant, caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte said after a meeting with his government to discuss new restrictions.

"I am here tonight in a sombre mood," Rutte said during a televised press conference. "To sum it up in one sentence, the Netherlands is going into lockdown again from tomorrow."

He added that the move was “unavoidable because of the fifth wave caused by the Omicron variant that is bearing down on us.”

Rutte admitted that the news was not what people were hoping for at Christmas. "So yes, a disappointing but perhaps not very big surprise," he said.

Elementary schools were ordered to close a week early for Christmas holidays until January 14.

Young children registered the steepest rises in infections in a recent coronavirus surge in the Netherlands.

Bars, restaurants, and other public meeting places such as theatres and cinemas have been shutting their doors at 5 pm since November 28 and will now have to continue through the holiday season.

Residents will be permitted only up to two visitors except for Christmas and New Year's, when four will be allowed, caretaker PM explained.

Rutte said that sustained high pressure on the health care system combined with the looming threat of the Omicron variant made measures unavoidable.

"This new variant is spreading considerably faster than the current Delta variant," he said, admitting not much is known about Omicron.

Earlier Tuesday, the country's public health institute in its weekly COVID-19 update said that positive tests declined by 21 per cent over the past week to 116,477.

Hospital admissions were down 10 per cent and intensive care units edged lower by 4 per cent, though the institute warned that the Omicron variant is expected to cause more infections and could in turn lead to an increase in hospital admissions.

Health minister Hugo de Jonge said the country's booster campaign will be accelerated so that every adult who wants a booster shot will be able to get one by the second half of January.
Football violence has broken out for the second time this season in France.

Crowd trouble forced the French Cup last-64 tie between Lyon and host Paris FC to be called off after half-time on Friday.

During the break, flares were thrown back and forth between home and visiting fans in one of the stands. Home-made fireworks also exploded loudly.

Incidents in the stands at the Stade Charléty further escalated as the second half was about to start, with the score 1-1.

As security staff and police streamed towards the stand, spectators fled onto the pitch and stopped the game from continuing.

The referee and players came out for the second-half kick-off but were forced to return to the dressing room.

Ten minutes later, the public had returned to the stand after the intervention of the police and stewards and the calls for calm from the stadium announcer.

After a delay, the stadium announcer told fans that "in agreement with the authorities the match will not be resumed."

Shortly afterwards Lyon FC announced that their fan groups would not be allowed to attend away games until further notice.

The French season has been pockmarked by incidents involving fans since the beginning of the season in August.

Lyon have already been ordered to play two games behind closed doors and deducted a league point after their home game on November 21 was abandoned when Marseille's Dimitri Payet was hit on the head by a bottle thrown from the crowd.

Marseille and Lyon were tied at 0-0 and the match is still to be replayed.
Europe is once again seeing a surge of COVID-19 cases — here is our summary of the measures being taken across the continent.

In some parts, the increase has been compounded by the emergence of the new Omicron variant, first detected in South Africa.

Some countries have taken steps targeting the unvaccinated, while programmes are also being rolled out in several nations to vaccinate young children.

United Kingdom
The UK set another record for the third day in a row with a further 93,045 confirmed COVID-19 cases reported on Friday (December 17) driven by the more transmissible Omicron variant.

On Saturday (December 18), London mayor Sadiq Khan declared a "major incident" after a "huge surge" of Omicron cases in the capital.

Major incident acts as a warning that hospitals and emergency services are unable to respond as they normally would due to extenuating circumstances.

“The Omicron variant has quickly become dominant, with cases increasing rapidly and the number of patients in our hospitals with Covid-19 on the rise again," Khan said.

“While we are still learning about this variant, it’s right that London’s key agencies work closely together to minimise the impact on our city, including helping to protect the vital vaccination programme.”

In England, the chief medical officer urged people to limit who they see in the festive period.

People now need certificates to get into nightclubs and sports stadiums, to prove they have been fully vaccinated or have had a recent negative test. Similar schemes are also in place in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson had warned that the country faced a "tidal wave" of infections from the Omicron variant, announcing a huge increase in booster vaccinations for all adults by the end of December. The previous target was the end of January.
Denmark
Denmark will seek to close theatres, cinemas, concert halls, amusement parks, museums and art galleries amid a record surge in COVID-19 infections driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant.

Stores and restaurants will have to limit their number of customers, and restaurants will have to close by 23:00.

The government earlier recommended that people work from home, banned concerts with more than 50 people standing and ordered people to wear face masks in eateries when not seated.

Ireland
Ireland issued an 8 pm curfew on pubs and restaurants in order to curb rising COVID-19 cases from Sunday (December 19). Indoor events will also be restricted with limits on capacity for all events.

Taoiseach Micheál Martin said Omicron was going to cause a "massive rise in infections" with more than a third of the country's new cases due to the new variant.

The new measures will last until at least 30 January.

The country already tightened restrictions from December 7, with nightclubs closing, and social distancing re-established in pubs, restaurants, and hotels.

Capacity in indoor and sports venues, where masks are already compulsory, was limited to 50%. A health pass is already required for entry to leisure venues.

Switzerland
Switzerland is restricting public life for those who are unvaccinated.

Only people who are vaccinated or recovered from COVID-19 will be able to access restaurants, cultural venues, or other indoor events. Private family gatherings should be limited to 10 people.

Swiss voters approved by a clear margin the so-called 'COVID-19 law' in a referendum on November 28.

The legislation, which is already in force, includes a pandemic recovery package and the application of a controversial COVID certificate.
France
The French government urged people to get tested and keep Christmas gatherings small amid high infections due to COVID-19.

Prime Minister Jean Castex said that in the new year the "health pass" will turn into a "vaccine pass" with more restrictions on people who are unvaccinated.

In Paris, the mayor's office announced on Saturday (December 18) that the fireworks and concerts planned on the famous avenue des Champs-Elysées for New Year's Eve have been cancelled. Castex asked all other mayors to consider cancelling their plans for public celebrations on December 31 as well.

France already closed nightclubs from Friday (December 10) for four weeks in an effort to curb rapidly rising COVID-19 infections.

From 15 January, all adults will need a booster jab at least seven months after being fully vaccinated in order to keep their health passes. From mid-December, people over the age of 65 will need one to have their health passes extended.

And from 30 January, all caregivers and firefighters in France will have to receive a third dose. French minister of health Olivier Véran announced the new provision on Saturday (December 18), stating that there are now "several hospital clusters of the Omicron variant," especially in the Paris region.

Some 76.8 per cent of France's 67.4 million people are fully vaccinated, according to the latest figures.

Italy
Italy will require unvaccinated EU citizens to quarantine for five days as part of stricter COVID-19 measures as the more transmissible Omicron variant spreads.

Vaccinated visitors from EU countries must get a negative test within 24 hours of arrival to circulate freely in Italy.

The Italian government on December 6 imposed new rules on those who are not vaccinated with the issuing of a "super" health pass.

Only people with proof of vaccination or of having recovered from COVID-19 can eat at indoor restaurants, go to the movies or attend sporting events. It has now extended the vaccine mandate to school personnel, law enforcement, the military, and anyone working in a health care setting.

A basic health pass, which includes the possibility of having a negative COVID-19 test, is now required for local transport.

The number of cases in Italy is on the rise, with the daily cases -- 7,576 on Saturday (December 18) -- the highest since March. The country's first Omicron case was recorded on November 27.

Austria
Austria lifted its lockdown on Sunday (December 12) for people with a "2G" pass, meaning they were vaccinated against COVID-19 or recently recovered from the illness.

People without the certificate are only allowed to leave their homes to go to work or for other essential purposes.

There is an 11 pm curfew for restaurants and an FFP2 mask is required on public transport and in indoor spaces.

Tens of thousands of people took to the streets in Vienna over the weekend to protest against mandatory vaccination and other virus measures.

The government, frustrated at the country's relatively low vaccine uptake, plans to make COVID vaccinations compulsory for all adults, taking effect from February.

Cyprus
Cyprus on Saturday (December 18) toughened COVID-19 screening for all travellers from the UK over age 12, including requiring them to quarantine until results are in from a lab test performed at the airport.

Cyprus’ Health Ministry cited Britain's “drastic increase” in omicron variant cases as the reason for the stepped-up measures, which apply to travellers regardless of whether they’ve been vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19.
Arriving passengers who test positive must remain in isolation until officials contact them with further instructions, while those who test negative will be given five rapid test kits that they must use during their stays on the Mediterranean island.

The island has been experiencing an increase in infections as well, with the seven-day average of almost 600 cases still somewhat below the peak 1,009 cases per week Cyprus saw in July 2021.

Russia
Russian authorities on Monday (December 13) backed away from introducing some of the restrictions for the unvaccinated that were announced a month earlier and elicited public outrage all across the vast country where vaccine uptake remains low.

The speaker of the State Duma, Russia's lower parliament house, announced the withdrawal of a bill restricting access to domestic and international flights and trains to those who do not present a health pass attesting they have been fully vaccinated, have recently recovered from COVID-19 or are medically exempt from vaccination.

Less than 50% of Russia's 146-million population has been fully vaccinated so far, even though Russia was among the first in the world to approve and roll out a coronavirus vaccine a year ago.

Norway
A 10-person limit for gatherings at private homes has come into effect to counter an increase in COVID-19 cases.

This is part of new measures announced earlier in the week by the government, which also include the reintroduction of social distancing in restaurants. Attendance at public events without assigned seating is capped at 50, while people are being urged to work from home.

The new measures are set to last four weeks although the number of people allowed at gatherings in private homes will be increased to 20 on Christmas and New Year's Eve.

“We consider the situation as being serious. Both Delta and Omicron infections are increasing in Norway. The number of people who are admitted to hospitals and intensive care units is increasing,” Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Stoere said.
The authorities recommend the use of face masks on public transportation and in shops and shopping malls.

Anyone entering Norway must be tested within 24 hours, either at the border, at a public test station or by self-test. If a rapid test comes back positive, a traveller must take a PCR test within 24 hours.

Poland
Poland will make COVID-19 vaccines mandatory for health workers, teachers, police, military and firefighters.

Health Minister Adam Niedzielski said on Tuesday that after March 1, vaccination will be a condition for performing jobs in these sectors.

Nightclubs will close and restaurants and theatres will operate at reduced capacity from 15 December amid rising infections. Public transport is being limited to 75% of capacity.

Germany
Germany's parliament voted overwhelmingly in favour of a vaccine mandate for hospital and care workers as the country tries to stem a wave of coronavirus infections.

Earlier, the country implemented new measures that exclude those who are unvaccinated from nonessential stores, restaurants and sports and cultural venues.

At least 68.9% of Germans are fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, short of the government's aim of a minimum 75% vaccination rate.

Some German regions including Berlin have begun vaccinating children under 12.

Czech Republic
Several thousand people marched through the Czech capital on Sunday (December 12), protesting a COVID-19 vaccination mandate for certain groups including people age 60 and over.

A 30-day state of emergency came into effect on Friday (November 26) as the Czech Republic reported record-high COVID-19 cases.

As part of the government's anti-COVID measures, all Christmas markets across the country are banned and people will not be allowed to drink alcohol in public places, health minister Adam Vojtech said. Bars, restaurants, nightclubs, discotheques, and casinos have to close at 10 p.m.

The number of people at culture and sports events will be limited to 1,000 who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 All other public gatherings can be attended by up to 100 visitors, down from 1,000.

Belgium
Prime Minister Alexander De Croo announced on Friday (December 3) that kindergartens and primary schools will close a week early for the Christmas holidays. Children must wear masks from the age of six.

There have also been protests against government plans to make vaccination mandatory for health workers early next year.

Those who refuse vaccination will be suspended from 1 January.
Greece
Greek authorities approved vaccinating children aged 5 to 11 from 15 December amid a surge in COVID-19 infections.

The explosion in cases also prompted Greek lawmakers to approve mandatory COVID-19 vaccination for people over 60 in response to a surge in cases.

If they do not get the vaccine by 16 January, they risk being fined €100 for every month they remain unvaccinated.

Portugal
Portugal reintroduced tighter pandemic restrictions on December 1 to contain a new surge in infections. Face masks have once again become mandatory and the country tightened control of its borders.

A digital certificate proving vaccination or recovery from COVID-19 is required to access restaurants, cinemas and hotels.

Portugal has a high vaccination rate with around 86% of its population fully vaccinated against the virus.
Spain
Several regions have introduced stricter measures for the unvaccinated ahead of the Christmas season, extending use of the COVID-19 certificate to enter public places such as bars and restaurants.

Many have protested the newly imposed health passes.

More than 80% of the Spanish population is already immunised, but fears of the Omicron variant have triggered a vaccination drive.

Since mid-November, nearly 200,000 Spaniards who were reluctant to get the vaccine at first have now finally taken the step.

Spain has given the go-ahead for children aged under 12 to be vaccinated.

Netherlands
The Netherlands is back to a nationwide lockdown starting Sunday (December 19) to curb the Omicron variant, caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte said after a meeting with his government to discuss new restrictions.

He added that the move was “unavoidable because of the fifth wave caused by the Omicron variant that is bearing down on us.”

Young children registered the steepest rises in infections in a recent coronavirus surge in the Netherlands.

Lockdown measures were introduced last month. Bars, restaurants and other public meeting places such as theatres and cinemas have been shutting their doors at 5 pm since November 28 and will now have to continue through the holiday season.
Amateurs sporting events are also not permitted between 17:00 and 05:00 with professional sports events allowed to proceed but with no spectators.

Slovakia
Slovakia declared a 90-day state of emergency and a two-week lockdown following a spike in COVID-19 cases that saw the country’s seven-day average of cases rise above 10,000.

Some retail stores such as for electronics, shoes, or household goods can be open between 5am and 8pm.

Many events are subject to a COVID-19 health pass.
Sweden
The Swedish government has announced that from December 1 a health pass will be required to attend any event of more than 100 people.

The COVID pass — attesting that the holder has either been fully vaccinated, tested negative over the previous 72 hours or recovered from the disease over the preceding six months — has so far only been used in Sweden for travel purposes.

The government also reversed its November 1 decision to stop testing fully vaccinated people.

Ukraine
Ukraine is still reporting a significant number of people testing positive to COVID-19, with about 9,000 cases registered just on Friday (December 17) and 2,028 hospitalisations.

Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy announced on November 16 that those who receive two jabs of the vaccine will be given a payment of 1,000 hryvnias, or about 33 euros in an attempt to alleviate vaccination reluctance.

Statistics on how many people received both doses vary greatly, with reports claiming that it stands anywhere between 20 and 28 per cent.
Bulgaria
Cases are decreasing in Bulgaria after a massive surge in October but the vaccination rate is still quite low at just a quarter of the population.

There were 1,443 new cases reported on Saturday (December 18) and 86 deaths -- a slight rise compared to last week's numbers. The health ministry said that more than 87% of the deaths were people who are unvaccinated. About 95,000 cases of COVID-19 infection are still active.

Romania
Romanian government eased some of the restrictions on Wednesday (December 8) as the number of those positive to COVID-19 fell to less than 1,500.

The new ease of measures includes eliminating a night curfew and an obligation to wear face masks outdoors.

Ahead of the holiday season, the government tightened travel restrictions, requiring negative COVID-19 tests and quarantining unvaccinated travelers. Passenger locator forms will also be introduced from December 20.

The country experienced the worst spike of infections with 15,000 daily cases recorded in early November, while the vaccination rate remained steady at just under 39 per cent in a country of about 19 million.

Latvia
From 15 December, people must present a COVID-19 vaccination or recovery certificate in order to show up to work.

People who are not vaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 are allowed in grocery shops, pharmacies and other essential shops.
Madagascar has witnessed an increase in vanilla beans following a swell in the demand of the product used to flavour foods or impart a fragrance.

Dealers now hoard the pods to sell later at a higher price. The soaring prices of the commodity has fostered a highly lucrative enviroment that has led to the rise of cartels and unscrupulous traders.

“The vendors have no gain. I am looking forward to stop this work because it is very hard. Everybody is dishonest. Whether they are 20, 40 or 60 years, all of them are lying,” vanilla vendor, Patrick Razafiarivo said.

Madagascar produces 80% of the world’s vanilla; but demand has outstripped supply. Speculation has pushed prices to triple in the last three years, reaching approximately 600 dollars a kilo this year.

The situation has led to an increase in crime considered as another negative consequence of dealing with the commodity.

“Certainly there are those who are in this industry solely for opportunism. It is becoming more and more difficult to convince others because some people have been discouraged after buying moldy, rotten vanilla,” a vanilla exporter, Lucia Salvetat said.

Madagascar earned about $650 million from vanilla last year equivalent to 5% of the country’s GDP. But proceeds from the sale of the commodity do not seem to have a positive impact on the economy. Out of eighty-six municipalities in the region, only six have access to electricity.
This year, Kazakhstan is marking the 30th anniversary of its independence.

Since 1991, the country has risen from relative obscurity and placed itself firmly on the world stage, with a steady economy and – according to the IMF – GDP predicted to climb further over the next few years.

Modern-day Kazakhstan has little in common with its storybook past, when nomadic peoples swept across the vast steppes and its economy hinged on the ancient Silk Routes.

Now the economic powerhouse of Central Asia, accounting for more than half of the region’s GDP, the ninth-largest country in the world has been transformed thanks in part to its large mineral reserves and in part to a series of comprehensive reforms, and its capital, Nur-Sultan, has become a thoroughly modern metropolis.

Sustained, diversified and dynamic growth throughout the nation remains one of the core goals for the country, which hopes to become one of the 30 most developed countries in the world by 2050.

Attracting international investment
One of the former Soviet republics worst affected by the Union’s collapse, Kazakhstan set upon surprisingly bold and ambitious reforms in the early 1990s. These were designed and conducted by the first president Elbasy Nursultan Nazarbayev, to encourage European, American and Asian companies to invest in what at the time was a largely struggling economy.

Foreign companies were initially drawn to Kazakhstan for its mineral resources, but many have since branched out into other industries. Over the 30 years of independence, the country has attracted more than $380 billion in foreign investment, which makes it the largest per capita recipient among the CIS countries.

The ongoing repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic have meant a dramatic global slowdown in transboundary investment flows – a decrease of 35 per cent worldwide in 2020 – but Kazakhstan’s figures have since bounced back, thanks to a stimulus package of $4,1 billion in 2020.

In the first half of 2021, foreign direct investment in the country amounted to $11,1 billion, a 30 per cent increase on the same period in 2020.

“The government prioritises supporting investors,” said Kazakhstan’s president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev in a recent meeting with leaders of international investment companies. “We provided tailored and wide-ranging support to each investor.”

In addition to the government’s anti-crisis measures, an important role was played by KAZAKH INVEST, a national company set up by the government in 2017, with a view to attracting major international corporations to the country. Its role is two-fold: to demonstrate Kazakhstan’s potential across a range of industries, and to support investors at every step of the journey.

In short, it operates as a single negotiator on behalf of the Kazakh government in discussing prospects and conditions for the implementation of investment projects. The company also promotes sustainable socio-economic development by attracting foreign investment in priority sectors.

As a one-stop shop for investors on the provision of public services, KAZAKH INVEST monitors and supports the progress of investment projects and serves as a hotline for investors, providing 24/7 service support.

The company’s remit is to provide operational help, including the prompt resolution of any administrative issues, such as those dealing with visas, migration, customs, advising on logistics and project implementation procedures. It is currently providing support and practical help to 466 projects, which have so far created more than 87,000 jobs. In 2021, 45 investment projects involving international collaboration have been commissioned. These have raised $3,5 billion and created around 4,800 jobs.

Multinationals taking part in these initiatives include Italian investor ENI, one of the top international investors in oil, gas and renewable energy in the country; French company Air Liquide, which has invested in the transfer of technology in the petrochemical industry; German investors Linde, who work in the sphere of technical gases, and many others.
Opportunities across a range of sectors
One of the objectives of KAZAKH INVEST is to showcase investment opportunities across a wide range of industries. As a huge country with a variety of terrains and a low population density, Kazakhstan has an immense number of agricultural resources. Thanks to the country’s strategic geographical location and an access to the markets of China, Russia and the Middle East, Kazakhstan has unique potential for agribusiness, including production and processing of both livestock and vegetables.

Tied to this, the government is injecting funds – via loans and tax incentives – into mechanical engineering, principally for the production of agricultural machinery and tractors. Engineering for the auto industry and electrical equipment has also been prioritised.

Kazakhstan’s petrochemical industry has gone from strength to strength in recent years, with the country’s oil reserves considered the 12th most important in the world. State support measures in the sector include state-regulated prices for industrial consumers.

Other regional industries already familiar to multinationals include mining and metallurgy (Kazakhstan ranks among the top countries for production of copper, gold, uranium, chromium, zinc and tungsten); infrastructure – the Belt and Road initiative creates an overland trade route between China and Europe, almost halving transit times – and trade.

State measures to simplify investment
During the COVID-19 pandemic, a legislative framework has been developed to exempt micro and small businesses from paying income tax for a period of three years, up to and including 2023. A legislative framework has been developed to exempt micro and small businesses from paying income tax for a period of three years, up to and including 2023.

Thirteen Special Economic Zones have been created, offering favourable taxation, and an ‘Investment Agreement’ has been introduced to provide special conditions for strategic investors. The country as a whole has seen changes to the law to help businesses, improvements in online services and an overhaul of the permit system.

International consulting companies, including the ‘Big Four’ (PwC, Deloitte, EY and KPMG) have been drafted in to help prepare investment proposals, and the Astana International Financial Centre (AIFC), which plays a major role in attracting financial investment, has English as its official language and provides the court system based on the principles of common law.

In order to promote these initiatives, Kazakh Invest held 10 online and offline investment events in 2021 for potential investors from the US, Switzerland, Belgium, Luxembourg, Spain, South Korea, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia and other countries. President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, Deputy Prime Minister - Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan Mukhtar Tileuberdi, and others, chaired the events.