Charles Kenny, the senior fellow at the Centre for Global Development, observed: "Technology has become one of the greatest vehicles for change. … Young people are natural adopters of new technologies and certainly, the potential for technology and digital media to be a force for innovation, education, and change is just beginning to be realized."

"Young people are natural adopters of new technologies and certainly the potential for technology and digital media to be a force for innovation, education, and change is just beginning to be realized."
The internet provides a unique opportunity for people everywhere to learn about themselves and their world. Today any literate person can ask any question, research any topic, check and analyze it, and come up with an in-depth understanding within weeks—something that, prior to this period in our history, would have taken months, even years. The internet also opens up possibilities for young people to connect as problem-solvers and participants in our global community.

Experiments with tablets and laptops have had limited success, unless the intervention is guided by national, cultural, and social considerations, and adapted to the local communities' unique needs and the task to be accomplished. Developers and content providers need a real understanding of the people who will be using the devices: who they are, where they are, and what they need to learn. As Epstein and Yuthas noted, students in poor areas of developing countries may first and foremost need to learn life skills that enable them to improve their financial prospects and well-being. These might include financial literacy and entrepreneurial skills, health maintenance and management, and administrative capabilities such as teamwork, problem-solving, and project management.

Teachers who have grown up with limited access to technology need training and professional development opportunities that are of sufficient duration and detail so they can understand and use educational technology resources for their learners. Studies show that the tendency to provide minimal training within a short time period does not work. This is a problem because so many teachers in developing countries are both under-qualified and underpaid. One solution might be to "train the trainers"— select the very best and train them sufficiently well to train others in their location.

kids gathered around a computer embedded in a wall
Children use Sugata Mitra's hole-in-the-wall computer in a slum in New Delhi. Credit: TED/Sugata Mitra.
Teacher shortage, in general, is a pressing issue for developing countries. According to UNESCO, the world needs another 69 million teachers to deliver education for all. Technology is sometimes considered as a way to compensate for the lack of teachers. In response to teacher shortages, Sugata Mitra initiated his famous "hole-in-the-wall" experiments and "Granny Cloud" programs that focus on students using computers to drive their own learning. The role of teachers is to pose big questions, and the Grannies to provide enthusiastic support and encouragement.

Bridge schools, the controversial chain of low-fee, for-profit schools operating in Africa and India, uses technology in a different way. pre-scripted lesson plans are written remotely, often in the US, and transmitted to e-readers in the hands of instructors who are not usually certified teachers, and who are not posing or encouraging questions.

Writes New York Times reporter Peg Tyre, "in some of the 20 or so Bridge classrooms I observed, pupils occasionally asked questions, but Bridge instructors ignored them. Teachers say that they are required to read the day's script as written or risk a reprimand or eventual termination, and they do not have time to entertain questions." The intentions may be good, but the results of these schools are not clear. Most concerning, says education professor Prachi Srivastava, is that "Impacts on higher-order skills, like creativity and critical thinking, are not known."

Another issue with educational technology in the developing world is that many schools still do not have reliable electricity or broadband access, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Many lack basic supplies like books, writing materials, and even a place to sit or a surface to write on. The widespread use of mobile devices and smartphones is improving access, though growth in Africa has slowed.

Mobile reading, opens up new pathways to literacy for marginalized groups, particularly women and girls.
Donald Clark, the founder of the e-learning company Epic Group, believes that learning with mobile technology is producing a "renaissance of reading and writing" among young people across the world, and is the "single most important factor in increasing literacy on the planet. Why? Every child is massively motivated to learn to text, post, and message. The evidence shows that they become obsessive readers and writers through mobile devices," he says. "Texting is a significant form of literacy, introduced by youngsters, on their own, spontaneously, rapidly and without tuition."

A 2014 UNESCO study, Reading in the Mobile Era, found that mobile reading, or m-learning, opens up new pathways to literacy for marginalized groups, particularly women and girls and others who may not have access to paper books. People use mobile devices to read to children, supporting literacy and other forms of learning, and seem to enjoy reading more and read more often.

Providing literacy, numeracy, other educational programs, and books to underserved communities via mobile devices is a natural solution through which communities can begin to leapfrog traditional twentieth-century educational methodologies. The price of a mobile book can be 300 times cheaper than obtaining a physical text.

women with cellphones in Afghanistan
Simple and common Nokia phones are found even in remote villages of Afghanistan. Software called "Ustad Mobile" utilizes these more affordable cell phones as teaching tools.
UNESCO's findings indicate that women and girls tend to use mobile devices for reading and learning more than do their male counterparts, but have less access to these devices than men. Since about two out of every three illiterate people are female, an urgent solution is to ensure women have equal access to mobile phones. There may well be cultural resistance to this in some countries. And unfortunately, governments are as yet not taking enough advantage of m-learning. More work needs to be done to promote this as a cost-effective way to improve education for men and women of all ages and to improve infrastructure and guarantee reliable broadband connectivity.

Many programs around the world are tackling the challenges of expanding meaningful education in the developing world, both public and private.

BRAC, a Bangladesh NGO dedicated to alleviating poverty by empowering the poor, owns and operates 32,000 primary schools operating in 12 countries.
Pratham provides literacy and other educational support programs and has served some 33 million children in India. Google has been funding Pratham through Storyweaver, an open-source platform to share and translate books. As many as 30 languages are spoken in India. Now with books in 60 languages and the ability to post new stories, the platform integrates Google Translate, transliteration tools, and Google volunteers to improve the translation. The goal is to provide 200,000 titles for 500,000 users.
Escuela Nueva, originating in Columbia, is an educational model for collaborative learning. Students work in small groups, using interactive modules designed to promote dialogue, critical thinking, and the application of new knowledge to family and community situations.
Savelugu Girls Model School in northern Ghana is one of the dozens of model schools in the north of the country funded and administered by the local authorities. According to Oxfam, who partnered with Ghana Education Service, the school district, and local communities to build the school, "Teaching is based on learner-centered methodologies, a concept that has previously not applied very often by teachers in this part of Ghana, who lacked the know-how to implement it. Discussions and group work are core elements. The girls form study groups in the evenings. Parents are invited to support the girls' education through school management committees. Computers are integrated into lessons, and teachers are trained to encourage the girls to participate actively in the classroom, and even to challenge teachers with individual points of view. These schools go beyond the national curriculum to address sexual health and life skills."
Future Prowess Foundation School in Maiduguri, Nigeria, incorporates Islamic education with Western education and vocational training. The school takes in children of Boko Haram fighters as well as those whose parents were killed by the fighters; the children of security forces attend, as do the children of traditional rulers and religious leaders. "Bringing them all to learn under the same roof promotes friendly co-existence among the children thereby building everlasting peace," says Suleiman Aliyu, the headteacher.
Corporations are also engaged, particularly in providing technology.

In 2016 Google launched a $50 million global program to support organizations that are using technology to help children who do not have basic math and reading skills, even after several years of school.
Google's Rumie educational tablet, targeted to older kids who can already read, is essentially a "library on a chip." It is low-cost, lightweight, updatable, trackable, and does not depend on an internet connection. Content can be adapted to age and learning level, tailored to the local context, and continually updated.
Worldreader uses technology to deliver books and other content, working with a variety of governments, nonprofits, local agencies, and corporations, notably Amazon. Worldreader has distributed about 25,000 preloaded Kindles to 160,000 people in 12 sub-Saharan African countries. Says David Risher, founder of Worldreader, "It really is the best way to get books into people's hands where the physical infrastructure isn't very good, the roads are bad, gas costs too much . . . but you can beam books through the cellphone network just like you can make a phone call—and that's really the thing that changes kids' lives." The e-readers contained culturally and age-appropriate reading materials in both local language and English.
Refugees: A Growing Crisis
According to the 2019 UNESCO Global Education Monitoring (GEM) report, Migration, Displacement and Education: Build Bridges Not Walls, there are in the world today more than 25 million refugees and nearly 60 million people internally displaced by war and natural disasters. More than half of refugees are under age 18, and 1 in 6 are under age 5. The school-age children in these populations could fill half a million classrooms. Clearly, the UN's landmark 2016 New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants call for all refugee and migrant children to be receiving education within a few months of arrival is not being met.

Refugee camp in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
In the world today there are more than 25 million refugees and nearly 60 million people internally displaced by war and natural disasters. Photo: the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by Julien Harneis.
The GEM report emphasizes that guaranteeing the right of migrant and refugee children to quality education serves the interests the children and their host communities. Says Director-General of UNESCO, Audrey Azoulay, "Everyone loses when the education of migrants and refugees is ignored. Education is the key to inclusion and cohesion. Increased classroom diversity, while challenging for teachers, can also enhance respect for diversity and an opportunity to learn from others. It is the best way to make communities stronger and more resilient."

The report issues seven recommendations:

Protect the right to education of migrants and displaced people.
Include migrants and displaced people in the national education system.
Understand and plan to meet the educational needs of migrants and displaced people.
Represent migration and displacement histories in education accurately to challenge prejudices.
Prepare teachers of migrants and refugees to address diversity and hardship.
Harness the potential of migrants and displaced people.
Support education needs of migrants and displaced people in humanitarian and development aid.
The world's track record on these recommendations is a mixed bag. Countries such as Rwanda, Uganda, and Iran have made considerable investments to ensure that refugees attend school side by side with their native children. Canada, with the largest percentage of immigrants among the seven richest industrialized countries, makes sure children learn about migration starting in second grade and enshrines multi-culturalism in its constitution. Ireland has the highest percentage of first generation immigrants in the European Union and has funded an intercultural education strategy, even in the midst of a deep financial crisis.