We are three scientists from different life backgrounds and professional pathways: female and male; of Latin-American, African and Anglo heritage; a student researcher, doctor and professor; a biogeochemist, marine biologist, and an economist.
But as diverse as our fields of study may seem, two things unite us: we have known for a long time that a healthy ocean is critical to life on earth and, more recently, we’ve learned that healthy fisheries are a crucial and deliverable part of climate action.
We want the world to know that conserving fish, fisheries, marine ecosystems, and the carbon services they provide will help us secure the environmental future we need.
Ocean issues, including but not limited to fishing, should be front and centre when it comes to drafting climate policies, and we view the upcoming UN climate conference, COP26 in Glasgow as a crucial opportunity to make that happen.
Our species cannot survive without healthy seas Humanity is nothing without the ocean. 
It is the source of all life on our planet. 
It produces half of the oxygen we breathe. 
It provides a reservoir for biodiversity, and it is the second-largest store of carbon on Earth.
Currently, the seas take up (“sequester”) 20 to 30 per cent of global emissions, and have absorbed more than 90 per cent of the excess heat generated since the start of the industrial revolution.
By some estimates, without this cooling effect, global temperatures would be 35°C warmer, making life on Earth untenable for most species, including ours.
The data and understanding of fish, and fishing’s influence on the ocean’s capacity to store that carbon, is less well known. 
Fortunately, this knowledge has been rapidly advancing in recent years.
The seas may be the source of all life on our planet, but they is also on the frontlines of what the UN Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, described as "humanity’s war on nature".
In this case, the war is being fought in part with industrial fishing vessels, designed to track down and capture massive amounts of fish.
If we continue on this path, we might trigger irreversible changes to the ecological conditions under which humanity has long evolved and thrived.
Fisheries are part of the solution.
The rise of cryptocurrencies could disproportionately impact those most vulnerable to the climate crisis, a new paper has found.

The digital infrastructure behind the most popular cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, requires as much energy as the whole of Thailand. Its carbon footprint is now larger than the gold mining industry, growing from 22 megatonnes of CO2 equivalents two years ago to 90 megatonnes a year in 2021.

This growing footprint alongside its economic and environmental impacts is putting communities on the frontlines of climate change at risk, argue Peter Howson from Northumbria University and Alex de Vries from Digiconomist.

Their new paper “looks at the disproportionate impact that those activities are having on the world's poorest rather than those who are participating in the sort of Bitcoin speculation mainly in the Global North.”

"The Global South predominantly is going to be the place that has the least resilience," Howson tells Euronews Green.
"Not only to the environmental shocks that come with climate change, which are perpetuated by proof of work mining, but also they're going to be those that have the least resilience towards the economic shocks that come with tumultuous price movements of cryptocurrencies."
For every $1 (€0.88)of value that Bitcoin generates, around $0.49 (€0.43) needs to be spent remedying environmental and public health issues linked to its energy use. And while around 100 million people have dabbled in cryptocurrencies since they were created, the number of people actively using them is relatively small.

"We’re only talking about 20 million active users," Howson explains. "If we were all using this technology, then perhaps you could justify such a massive carbon footprint."