We are three scientists from different life backgrounds and professional pathways: female and male; of Latin-American, African and Anglo heritage; a student researcher, doctor and professor; a biogeochemist, marine biologist, and an economist.
But as diverse as our fields of study may seem, two things unite us: we have known for a long time that a healthy ocean is critical to life on earth and, more recently, we’ve learned that healthy fisheries are a crucial and deliverable part of climate action.
We want the world to know that conserving fish, fisheries, marine ecosystems, and the carbon services they provide will help us secure the environmental future we need.
Ocean issues, including but not limited to fishing, should be front and centre when it comes to drafting climate policies, and we view the upcoming UN climate conference, COP26 in Glasgow as a crucial opportunity to make that happen.
Our species cannot survive without healthy seas
Humanity is nothing without the ocean. It is the source of all life on our planet. It produces half of the oxygen we breathe. It provides a reservoir for biodiversity, and it is the second-largest store of carbon on Earth.
Currently, the seas take up (“sequester”) 20 to 30 per cent of global emissions, and have absorbed more than 90 per cent of the excess heat generated since the start of the industrial revolution.
By some estimates, without this cooling effect, global temperatures would be 35°C warmer, making life on Earth untenable for most species, including ours.
The data and understanding of fish, and fishing’s influence on the ocean’s capacity to store that carbon, is less well known. Fortunately, this knowledge has been rapidly advancing in recent years.
The seas may be the source of all life on our planet, but they is also on the frontlines of what the UN Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, described as “humanity’s war on nature”.
In this case, the war is being fought in part with industrial fishing vessels, designed to track down and capture massive amounts of fish.
If we continue on this path, we might trigger irreversible changes to the ecological conditions under which humanity has long evolved and thrived.
Fisheries are part of the solution
To navigate ourselves out of this mess, we must turn the political arena that equipped and enabled this war into one that recognises ocean biodiversity, and the preservation of healthy fish populations, as integral to climate and ecological “success”.
Countries must demobilise and redirect, retool and re-equip their fisheries. Instead of racing to catch shrinking fish populations, we need to fish less.
We also need to fish in ways that respect marine food webs, while ending the obliteration of so-called ‘unwanted’ species and supporting human livelihoods.
At the same time, we must acknowledge and support the efforts of fishing companies that are already striving to fish sustainably, and support small-scale fishers and coastal communities in becoming more resilient to climate change.
Research shows that this is possible. Doing so would allow the seas to absorb more carbon, have lower carbon emissions, and be good for both people and profits.
Europeans will be among the most affected by trawling
A recent paper by conservationist Enric Sala and colleagues outlined how all marine sediments combine to form the largest pool of organic carbon on the planet.
However, destructive fishing methods such as trawling cause the release of CO2 stored in marine sediment. By their estimates, approximately 1.47 billion tonnes of carbon are released by trawling every year: a similar volume to emissions from the global aviation industry.
For Europeans, this is especially relevant because new research shows that European seas are some of the most heavily trawled, but also the most carbon-rich.
Ocean solutions to climate change can provide up to one-fifth of the necessary emissions reductions we need if we are to limit climate change to 1.5°C.
Leaving fish in the ocean can contribute to these efforts. This is new, it’s exciting, and it’s climate action that we can (and we desperately need to) deliver quickly.
Foreground ocean health at COP26
At the COP26 negotiations in Glasgow, nature will be discussed as central to strategies on lessening climate change.
But although the third ‘Because the Ocean’ declaration will be launched by coastal/island nations from across the globe, alongside other blue carbon events, these are likely to play second fiddle to the nitty-gritty of carbon counting that goes on in the official negotiations.
This is the fifth COP since the signing of the Paris Agreement. Many big-emitter countries are struggling to demonstrate how their promises to reduce emissions will be enough.
And in some cases, even our language is lacking. Mentions of the ocean during negotiations have been few and far between.
We have known for decades that ending overfishing is the right thing to do for both fisheries and for biodiversity.
As scientists who study fish and fisheries, we contend that every country with an ocean-going fleet can take steps to enact ocean-climate action today by phasing out destructive fishing practices (including overfishing), and counting fish as part of their national inventories of carbon emissions and storage.
A healthy ocean isn’t a sideshow to climate action. It is essential. And we need to start treating it as such.
Emma Cavan is a Research Fellow at Imperial College, London. Erica M. Ferrer is a PhD candidate at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego. Rashid Sumaila is a University Killam Professor at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Coral reefs might only cover a tiny fraction of the ocean floor, but they are home to around a quarter of all marine species. Many though are dying due to warming oceans and pollution. In this episode, Ocean looks at what's been done to not only preserve reefs but also bring them back to life.

Bonaire is a Dutch island in the Caribbean Sea famous for its extraordinarily rich coral reef. A true wonder of the ocean, reefs provide income and food to hundreds of thousands of people. They also capture carbon dioxide and protect tropical shorelines from storms. Bonaire designated its coastal waters a national marine park in 1979. All marine activity is strictly regulated by rangers who patrol to enforce the rules.
"Everything from the high water line to 60 metres deep is the Bonaire National Marine Park. We have one of the best protected reefs in the Caribbean area. Anywhere you go in the water, you are guaranteed to see some amazing biodiversity," explains Roxanne-Liana Francisca, a wildlife and marine biologist at STINAPA Bonaire.
'We have lost already almost half of our reefs''
The rangers use sensors to check the temperature of the water at various depths: warming can cause bleaching, either turning the coral white or in some cases killing it. Wastewater, or the ingredients found in sunscreen also pose a threat, as does overfishing, which can lead to the spread of harmful algae and worms. For those reasons, biologists monitor the reefs for signs of damage.
"People have been looking at our reefs in one way or another for the past 40 years. Even though our reefs are still in pretty good shape, we have lost already almost half of our reefs, if we look at the five and 10 metre depths. Last year we had a really big bleaching event where about 60 percent of our reefs had some degree of bleaching. Luckily for us, most of the corals did recover," Francisca says.
The health of the reef is deeply connected to Bonaire’s inland ecosystem — with its rich wetlands, mangroves and bird habitats. Over the past decade, Bonaire’s population has doubled. That has led to increasing amounts of waste and pollution - for instance from deforestation - ending up in the ocean. Such threats to the coral are not unique to Bonaire.
Recent research shows that over the past decade, our planet has lost 14% of its coral reefs. If this decline continues, coral may face complete extinction — with disastrous consequences both for marine life and for coastal economies.
One shallow area we visit, used to be a thriving reef just a few decades ago. Now it is covered with dead coral debris.
"Unfortunately, coral reefs are dying all around the world. And although in Bonaire, we can still say that we have sort of one of the best Caribbean reefs, it's not as pristine as it was," explains Francesca.
One way to give coral a fighting chance is so-called “coral gardening”: around 15,000 corals of several different species are grown in local underwater nurseries. Reproduction is encouraged by cutting the coral in half - a technique known as fragmenting.
"You know, corals, in reality, are colonies of thousands of little polyps, and they can split and form new polyps. So let's say I'm a coral and I cut a piece of my arm. The arm will be able to grow another Francesca, and Francesca will be able to grow another arm, so we'll have two Francescas."
"Reef Renewal Bonaire" has only a few members of staff. The non-profit organisation relies mostly on private donations and volunteer support, though some of its projects do get public funding, including from the EU.

"We are outplanting more than seven and a half thousand pieces of coral this year over the 10 restoration sites we have... On every tree, in every nursery we have here, all the corals are from the same genotype. And this way, when they are put together or they touch together, they will grow together and fuse together," says Reef Renewal's restoration technician Ernst Noyons.
Genetic similarities within the coral, however, can make the reef vulnerable. A new restoration technique can eliminate this by using the coral’s reproductive cells instead of fragmenting.
"We use the sexual reproduction of corals to produce new, genetically unique individuals. And it's very important because the higher is the genetic diversity on the reef, the more resilient is the reef itself," Francesca says.
The coral releases reproductive cells into the water during what’s known as “mass spawning events”. Researchers collect these, fertilising them in the lab, to produce larvae that then settles on star-shaped ceramic plates that are placed in floating pools at sea.
"We make sure that we have a lot of larvae settle on this stars, and then we bring the stars, in order of thousands, and we outplant them back to the reef - and then we monitor the growth of the little settlement on it." explains Virdis.
Klein Bonaire is a small protected island off Bonaire's west coast and home to a vast reef of staghorn corals. Two thousand square meters in size, this is just one of Reef Renewal’s many plantations. The team stress everyone can play their part — be it, using eco-friendly sunscreens, making a donation, or even by becoming a coral restoration volunteer themselves. Divers can take a two-day training course to learn the basics on how to maintain a coral nursery.
"Almost 80 percent of the dive shops in Bonaire — they're part of the programme now, and the people are super, super enthusiastic," Reef Renewal's diving instructor Guillermo Alcorta tells us.
A marine biologist from Belgium taking part in the training tells us: "I think reef preservation projects are vitally important! I really wanted to learn about it in much more depth so I could play a role."
Another marine biologist from the UK, who is also taking part in the training, says: "Sometimes it seems very far away, it's under the water — how can you help? But this is giving people a hands on opportunity to make a difference.''
This work by enthusiasts can make a huge difference in the preservation of local reefs. But the long-term survival of coral will depend on our ability to reverse both global warming and eliminate other threats to marine life in the decades to come.
In honour of World Oceans Day, she writes exclusively for Euronews Green about the importance of the oceans for the health of the planet and the difference that carbon removal projects can make.
To me, the ocean is many things. As an environmentalist, it’s an invaluable resource that’s home to some of the world’s most incredible species. As a mother, it’s an absolute wonder for my 9-year-old son. As an explorer, it’s a source of inspiration and adventure. As The TreadRight Foundation's ‘Planet’ Ambassador, it’s an enormous source of hope for our future.
Today on World Oceans Day, we advocate for the protection of our world’s ocean waters and habitats. I could scare you with the litany of risks facing our oceans. But I’d prefer to instil hope for the potential within our oceans to right some of our most egregious wrongs.
Ocean restoration is key
The wellbeing of humanity relies on the wellbeing of the planet. The list of challenges we collectively face can feel endless. The list of solutions addressing climate change, however, is steadily growing, and we may have to look no further than the waters surrounding us.
Our oceans need protection. We must eliminate the eight million pieces of daily plastic waste polluting our waterways by pursuing the long-term solution: prevention. But we wouldn’t be telling the whole story without addressing the fact that ocean restoration will unlock a natural means to mitigate humanity’s excessive carbon footprint and empower climate action.
The power of a common rock to capture 1GT of carbon every year
I believe in big, bold ideas that are based in nature and backed by science. I believe each one of us is the solution. This is why, for the past 10 years, I’ve worked with the TreadRight Foundation to share the sustainable travel initiatives it supports worldwide. Two of the latest projects are marine-based carbon removal solutions, chosen for the way they support TTC’s Climate Action Plan.
TreadRight’s first carbon removal partner is Project Vesta. They are exploring the natural power of the ocean as a carbon sink, while also tackling the problem of ocean acidification. The organisation is on a mission to harness the natural power of the oceans to remove a trillion tonnes of excess carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
They do this by taking olivine, a naturally occurring rock found on every continent, crushing it up and moving it to beaches or coastal areas where it can be broken down further by the natural weathering process of wave action. As the olivine sand breaks down, carbon dioxide is removed from the air and becomes bicarbonate, which is used by marine organisms in their shells and eventually ends up as limestone on the ocean floor.
Project Vesta estimates olivine could capture 1 gigatonne of carbon dioxide a year if deployed on just 0.25 per cent of global shelf seas. It would take 16 billion tree seedlings growing for 10 years to sequester the same amount of carbon.
Vesta has pilot beaches in the Caribbean and Hawaii. When they have validated that the process works and is ecologically sound, they will share their results so Coastal Carbon Capture can be replicated in coastal areas worldwide.
These projects, which harness the power of the ocean to ultimately benefit people, wildlife and our planet’s future, show us the solutions we require already exist, provided to us by nature. I call on governments and businesses worldwide to seek out these solutions and help them scale so we may all benefit.
A farming technique ‘to heal our planet’
GreenWave is trying to show the many benefits of ‘zero input farming.’ GreenWave is studying how kelp, extracted from the ocean, can be added to soil to increase its carbon storage potential, while decreasing harmful nitrous oxide emissions on regenerative land farms.
These projects, which harness the power of the ocean to ultimately benefit people, wildlife and our planet’s future, show us the solutions we require already exist, provided to us by nature. I call on governments and businesses worldwide to seek out these solutions and help them scale so we may all benefit.
A farming technique ‘to heal our planet’
GreenWave is trying to show the many benefits of ‘zero input farming.’ GreenWave is studying how kelp, extracted from the ocean, can be added to soil to increase its carbon storage potential, while decreasing harmful nitrous oxide emissions on regenerative land farms.
In September, we had three opportunities to present our work on the interplay between climate change, the ocean and fisheries. Our webinars were aimed at helping MEPs, members of EU Commissioners’ cabinets, and engaged members of the public and media to better understand the challenges facing the ocean, and to spell out the readily available actions that European citizens can take to protect it. We explored how the European Union and its member states can lessen the impacts of climate change on Europe’s seas, by ending the practice of destructive overfishing.
During the same period, commitments made by world leaders on climate action at the UN General Assembly, and the Pledge for Nature at the UN Biodiversity Summit, have highlighted both the global momentum and need for such action to be taken.
Healthy fish are like healthy people; a healthy person is more likely to survive an epidemic than a person who is unwell. Overfishing has severely weakened the ocean’s immune system, and climate change will only make things worse.
These new, increasingly urgent pledges are the culmination of the acknowledgements and ambitions that have been building among the global community for decades, and are most holistically represented by the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) for 2030, which embrace the three pillars of sustainable development: environment, society and economy.
In fact, the success of all 17 goals rely, to some extent, on the success of one, SDG14 - Life Below Water, which is the critical component of the founding pillar, the environment. Ocean resources, data, science and services are critical for successful and healthy human life on the planet. It is actually a matter of life or death.
Planet Earth is warming. Or, as our planet is 71 per cent ocean, perhaps we should call it Planet Ocean. We are nothing without the ocean. It provides us with roughly every second breadth, a reservoir for biodiversity and all the services it provides humans, and a source of over 90 per cent of fresh water. Yet we are treating our ocean with contempt. As well as overexploiting its natural riches, the ocean is warming due to emissions of heat-trapping gases resulting from human activities. It has taken in 20 to 30 per cent of the global emissions from human activities over the past three decades, inducing ocean acidification, and more than 90 per cent of the excess heat in the climate system, making climate change irreversible. Without the ocean, our air would be an extra 35 degrees celsius warmer.
Despite a multitude of promises from a succession of world leaders, we are clearly struggling to limit the future increases in average planetary temperature to the 2 degrees celsius agreed (despite the fact that scientists have repeatedly warned that 1.5 degrees celsius should be the target). While enormous efforts must be made to limit emissions, there are ways we can ensure that the ocean can continue to absorb carbon emissions and be stronger in the face of future climate change impacts.
With climate change, the ocean is becoming more acidic, less oxygenated, warmer and sea levels are rising; it sounds as bad as it is. This is making life harder at all levels in the ocean; from the individual fish, to marine populations, and ecosystems - which in turn, is making it harder for fisheries.
Humanity has a long history of overexploiting fish, the lifeblood of the ocean on which we depend. This never has a good outcome: no fish means no fisheries, jobs, seafood or incomes for coastal communities. Conversely, well-managed fisheries means an ocean that teems with life. This life not only provides us fish, it can also play an important role in climate mitigation and adaptation. A healthy ocean ecosystem ensures that high levels of carbon can be sequestered below the waves. A healthy ocean is crucial to bolstering our planet against the worst impact of climate change.
All of these new pledges show that global leaders still aim to get us out of this planetary crisis we have created. But the EU, and governments worldwide, must match that ambition with action. They must eliminate carbon emissions, effectively protect at least 30 per cent of marine areas by 2030, and reduce destructive overfishing and publicly-funded subsidies that undermine our other efforts. We will very quickly be rewarded with higher catches for more fishers, a healthier ocean, and a stronger defence against climate change.
Healthy fish are like healthy people; a healthy person is more likely to survive an epidemic than a person who is unwell. Overfishing has severely weakened the ocean’s immune system, and climate change will only make things worse. If we continue to destroy the health of the ocean with destructive overfishing, it will have severe impacts on life in the ocean and on all our lives.
The risks and the opportunity here are clear, just as the science is. It is time for EU governments and the European Commission to start delivering on their commitments - and that means fishing within nature’s limits.

