We are three scientists from different life backgrounds and professional pathways: female and male; of Latin-American, African and Anglo heritage; a student researcher, doctor and professor; a biogeochemist, marine biologist, and an economist.

But as diverse as our fields of study may seem, two things unite us: we have known for a long time that a healthy ocean is critical to life on earth and, more recently, we’ve learned that healthy fisheries are a crucial and deliverable part of climate action.

We want the world to know that conserving fish, fisheries, marine ecosystems, and the carbon services they provide will help us secure the environmental future we need.

Ocean issues, including but not limited to fishing, should be front and centre when it comes to drafting climate policies, and we view the upcoming UN climate conference, COP26 in Glasgow as a crucial opportunity to make that happen.

Our species cannot survive without healthy seas
Humanity is nothing without the ocean. It is the source of all life on our planet. It produces half of the oxygen we breathe. It provides a reservoir for biodiversity, and it is the second-largest store of carbon on Earth.
Currently, the seas take up (“sequester”) 20 to 30 per cent of global emissions, and have absorbed more than 90 per cent of the excess heat generated since the start of the industrial revolution.

By some estimates, without this cooling effect, global temperatures would be 35°C warmer, making life on Earth untenable for most species, including ours.
The data and understanding of fish, and fishing’s influence on the ocean’s capacity to store that carbon, is less well known. Fortunately, this knowledge has been rapidly advancing in recent years.

The seas may be the source of all life on our planet, but they is also on the frontlines of what the UN Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, described as “humanity’s war on nature”.

In this case, the war is being fought in part with industrial fishing vessels, designed to track down and capture massive amounts of fish.

If we continue on this path, we might trigger irreversible changes to the ecological conditions under which humanity has long evolved and thrived.
Fisheries are part of the solution
To navigate ourselves out of this mess, we must turn the political arena that equipped and enabled this war into one that recognises ocean biodiversity, and the preservation of healthy fish populations, as integral to climate and ecological “success”.

Countries must demobilise and redirect, retool and re-equip their fisheries. Instead of racing to catch shrinking fish populations, we need to fish less.

We also need to fish in ways that respect marine food webs, while ending the obliteration of so-called ‘unwanted’ species and supporting human livelihoods.

At the same time, we must acknowledge and support the efforts of fishing companies that are already striving to fish sustainably, and support small-scale fishers and coastal communities in becoming more resilient to climate change.

Research shows that this is possible. Doing so would allow the seas to absorb more carbon, have lower carbon emissions, and be good for both people and profits.

Europeans will be among the most affected by trawling
A recent paper by conservationist Enric Sala and colleagues outlined how all marine sediments combine to form the largest pool of organic carbon on the planet.

However, destructive fishing methods such as trawling cause the release of CO2 stored in marine sediment. By their estimates, approximately 1.47 billion tonnes of carbon are released by trawling every year: a similar volume to emissions from the global aviation industry.

For Europeans, this is especially relevant because new research shows that European seas are some of the most heavily trawled, but also the most carbon-rich.

Ocean solutions to climate change can provide up to one-fifth of the necessary emissions reductions we need if we are to limit climate change to 1.5°C.

Leaving fish in the ocean can contribute to these efforts. This is new, it’s exciting, and it’s climate action that we can (and we desperately need to) deliver quickly.
Foreground ocean health at COP26
At the COP26 negotiations in Glasgow, nature will be discussed as central to strategies on lessening climate change.

But although the third ‘Because the Ocean’ declaration will be launched by coastal/island nations from across the globe, alongside other blue carbon events, these are likely to play second fiddle to the nitty-gritty of carbon counting that goes on in the official negotiations.

This is the fifth COP since the signing of the Paris Agreement. Many big-emitter countries are struggling to demonstrate how their promises to reduce emissions will be enough.
And in some cases, even our language is lacking. Mentions of the ocean during negotiations have been few and far between.

We have known for decades that ending overfishing is the right thing to do for both fisheries and for biodiversity.

As scientists who study fish and fisheries, we contend that every country with an ocean-going fleet can take steps to enact ocean-climate action today by phasing out destructive fishing practices (including overfishing), and counting fish as part of their national inventories of carbon emissions and storage.

A healthy ocean isn’t a sideshow to climate action. It is essential. And we need to start treating it as such.

Emma Cavan is a Research Fellow at Imperial College, London. Erica M. Ferrer is a PhD candidate at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego. Rashid Sumaila is a University Killam Professor at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Coral reefs might only cover a tiny fraction of the ocean floor, but they are home to around a quarter of all marine species. Many though are dying due to warming oceans and pollution. In this episode, Ocean looks at what's been done to not only preserve reefs but also bring them back to life.

Bonaire is a Dutch island in the Caribbean Sea famous for its extraordinarily rich coral reef. A true wonder of the ocean, reefs provide income and food to hundreds of thousands of people. They also capture carbon dioxide and protect tropical shorelines from storms. Bonaire designated its coastal waters a national marine park in 1979. All marine activity is strictly regulated by rangers who patrol to enforce the rules.

"Everything from the high water line to 60 metres deep is the Bonaire National Marine Park. We have one of the best protected reefs in the Caribbean area. Anywhere you go in the water, you are guaranteed to see some amazing biodiversity," explains Roxanne-Liana Francisca, a wildlife and marine biologist at STINAPA Bonaire.

'We have lost already almost half of our reefs''
The rangers use sensors to check the temperature of the water at various depths: warming can cause bleaching, either turning the coral white or in some cases killing it. Wastewater, or the ingredients found in sunscreen also pose a threat, as does overfishing, which can lead to the spread of harmful algae and worms. For those reasons, biologists monitor the reefs for signs of damage.

"People have been looking at our reefs in one way or another for the past 40 years. Even though our reefs are still in pretty good shape, we have lost already almost half of our reefs, if we look at the five and 10 metre depths. Last year we had a really big bleaching event where about 60 percent of our reefs had some degree of bleaching. Luckily for us, most of the corals did recover," Francisca says.
The health of the reef is deeply connected to Bonaire’s inland ecosystem — with its rich wetlands, mangroves and bird habitats. Over the past decade, Bonaire’s population has doubled. That has led to increasing amounts of waste and pollution - for instance from deforestation - ending up in the ocean. Such threats to the coral are not unique to Bonaire.
Recent research shows that over the past decade, our planet has lost 14% of its coral reefs. If this decline continues, coral may face complete extinction — with disastrous consequences both for marine life and for coastal economies.
Recent research shows that over the past decade, our planet has lost 14% of its coral reefs. If this decline continues, coral may face complete extinction — with disastrous consequences both for marine life and for coastal economies.
One shallow area we visit, used to be a thriving reef just a few decades ago. Now it is covered with dead coral debris.

"Unfortunately, coral reefs are dying all around the world. And although in Bonaire, we can still say that we have sort of one of the best Caribbean reefs, it's not as pristine as it was," explains Francesca.

One way to give coral a fighting chance is so-called “coral gardening”: around 15,000 corals of several different species are grown in local underwater nurseries. Reproduction is encouraged by cutting the coral in half - a technique known as fragmenting.

"You know, corals, in reality, are colonies of thousands of little polyps, and they can split and form new polyps. So let's say I'm a coral and I cut a piece of my arm. The arm will be able to grow another Francesca, and Francesca will be able to grow another arm, so we'll have two Francescas."
"Reef Renewal Bonaire" has only a few members of staff. The non-profit organisation relies mostly on private donations and volunteer support, though some of its projects do get public funding, including from the EU.

"We are outplanting more than seven and a half thousand pieces of coral this year over the 10 restoration sites we have... On every tree, in every nursery we have here, all the corals are from the same genotype. And this way, when they are put together or they touch together, they will grow together and fuse together," says Reef Renewal's restoration technician Ernst Noyons.

Genetic similarities within the coral, however, can make the reef vulnerable. A new restoration technique can eliminate this by using the coral’s reproductive cells instead of fragmenting.

"We use the sexual reproduction of corals to produce new, genetically unique individuals. And it's very important because the higher is the genetic diversity on the reef, the more resilient is the reef itself," Francesca says.

The coral releases reproductive cells into the water during what’s known as “mass spawning events”. Researchers collect these, fertilising them in the lab, to produce larvae that then settles on star-shaped ceramic plates that are placed in floating pools at sea.

"We make sure that we have a lot of larvae settle on this stars, and then we bring the stars, in order of thousands, and we outplant them back to the reef - and then we monitor the growth of the little settlement on it." explains Virdis.
Klein Bonaire is a small protected island off Bonaire's west coast and home to a vast reef of staghorn corals. Two thousand square meters in size, this is just one of Reef Renewal’s many plantations. The team stress everyone can play their part — be it, using eco-friendly sunscreens, making a donation, or even by becoming a coral restoration volunteer themselves. Divers can take a two-day training course to learn the basics on how to maintain a coral nursery.

"Almost 80 percent of the dive shops in Bonaire — they're part of the programme now, and the people are super, super enthusiastic," Reef Renewal's diving instructor Guillermo Alcorta tells us.
A marine biologist from Belgium taking part in the training tells us: "I think reef preservation projects are vitally important! I really wanted to learn about it in much more depth so I could play a role."

Another marine biologist from the UK, who is also taking part in the training, says: "Sometimes it seems very far away, it's under the water — how can you help? But this is giving people a hands on opportunity to make a difference.''

This work by enthusiasts can make a huge difference in the preservation of local reefs. But the long-term survival of coral will depend on our ability to reverse both global warming and eliminate other threats to marine life in the decades to come.
This month in Climate Now we report on the big changes underway in our oceans from a fish market in Denmark.

We see how climate change is playing a big role in the rapid evolution of fish populations worldwide, with species that can migrate now moving to cooler habitats, while those that are left struggle to survive.

Before we dive into the details of Danish fishing, a quick look at the latest data from the Copernicus Climate Change Service.

May continues the cold spell in Europe
In Europe, we saw the cold spell from April continue into May with temperatures -0.5 degrees below the new 1991-2020 average.

Overall, the climate figures for May show a great deal of contrasts, illustrated by the map below showing surface air temperature anomaly.
In Europe, we saw the cold spell from April continue into May with temperatures -0.5 degrees below the new 1991-2020 average.

Overall, the climate figures for May show a great deal of contrasts, illustrated by the map below showing surface air temperature anomaly.
In north-western Europe it was both cold and damp. For example, Wales had its wettest May on record with 245 millimetres of rain.

Fish populations move northwards as temperatures rise

Climate change is a global issue with global effects that many of us will be aware of on land. However, the oceans absorb the majority of the excess heat in our climate system, and the waters or our planet are warming, too.

This is having a direct impact on fish populations, with those species which are able to move to new habitats now shifting into areas to the north or south where the temperatures better suit their metabolisms.

The reason is that fish are particularly sensitive to changes in temperature, due to being cold-blooded animals. They also live in habitats close to their upper temperature limit, meaning that even a slight change in temperature can impact their ability to feed and breed.

We went to the fish auction at the Danish port of Gilleleje, north of Copenhagen, to get the measure of the changes on the ground. Local fishers in this area say they are under pressure from restrictive quotas, they complain that agricultural run-off is polluting the water, and they're also witnessing the effects of climate change.
This means that they're finding new kinds of fish in their nets. According to the auctioneer, Lasse Nordahl, this year they're starting to see octopus, a species they didn't see before, and the appearance of witch flounder.

"We didn’t see them when I started here", he tells Euronews.

Red Mullet and hake are other examples of species of fish often found further south in Europe which are now ending up in Danish waters.
Mark Payne a Senior Researcher at the Technical University of Denmark, explains that the reaction of fish to climate change is quite clear and evident. They are moving because they can't find respite from unfavorable temperatures, unlike mammals and lizards on land.

"On land, if it gets too hot, you can go and shelter under a tree or maybe burrow, whereas the ocean tends to be much more uniform. There is no shelter. It's much more difficult to get respite from challenging conditions than it is on land," he explains.
The Technical University of Denmark has been monitoring Danish waters for many decades, and its surveys have clearly shown the effect climate change is having in recent decades.

According to Louise Lundgaard a Research Technician at the university, there are two key trends: the arrival of species associated wiht Biscay and the Mediterranean, like tuna, hake and anchovy, and the decline of local fish like Baltic cod.

The decline is clearly visible in the size and weight of the cod. "A cod that's four years old is smaller than it would have been, for instance, ten years ago," she explains. This is due to the fact that they are focusing more on reproducing than they are on growing.

"That can be both because of the temperature of the water, the condition of the food, the amount of food and a lot of factors," she concludes.

These changes occurring in Denmark are happening worldwide too, and it has broad implications, according to Mark Payne. "It certainly creates a challenge for all of the communities and businesses that are dependent on the ocean," he says. These people are now forced to "adapt their fishing techniques, how they store and process fish, and essentially also how they sell the fish further down the supply chain."

As consumers, we can play an important role in managing and adapting to this transition by buying fish that is considered to be sustainably sourced.