For three consecutive weekends, thousands of protesters in Belgrade and other towns across the country blocked main roads and bridges to oppose Rio Tinto's plans in the lead-up to the vote.

The rallies were seen as the biggest challenge yet to Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić.

He has responded by saying more transparency is needed about Rio Tinto's operations, while asking the parliament to reconsider two recent law changes that would have made it easier for Rio Tinto to begin its operations near Loznica.

Protesters say any lithium mining could inflict lasting ecological damage to rivers and farmland in the region.

Environmental groups such as Friends of the Earth say lithium extraction can harm the soil and cause air contamination.

They say it also requires a lot of water -- around 500,000 gallons per tonne of lithium -- which is damaging in countries that also suffer from water scarcity, such as Peru.

In a press release from November 16th, the company said the project "has the potential (...) to position Rio Tinto as the largest source of lithium supply in Europe for at least the next 15 years."
Local authorities in western Serbia have suspended plans to operate a lithium mine after widespread environmental protests.

Mining giant Rio Tinto had been expected to start work in the near future, but a town council in Loznica voted to suspend a regional development plan that permitted the excavation of lithium.

The vote on Thursday came days after Serbia's parliament suspended two key laws that ecologists said would allow the mining company to start the project.

For three consecutive weekends, thousands of protesters in Belgrade blocked main roads and bridges to oppose Rio Tinto's plans.

The rallies were seen as the biggest challenge yet to Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić.

"Whether there will be a mine depends on people [in western Serbia] and the study on environmental impact assessment," said Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabić.
Although Rio Tinto said it would adhere to all the latest environmental protection standards, protesters said the lithium excavation could inflict lasting ecological damage to rivers and farmland in the region.

Now that the lithium mine plans are on hold, Vučić has said that Serbia will "have to speak in a different way to Rio Tinto and others".

Throughout its almost 150-year history, the multinational company has faced accusations of corruption, environmental degradation, and human rights abuses at its excavation sites.

Lithium, which is used in batteries for electric cars, is considered one of the most sought-after metals of the future as the world shifts to more renewable energy sources.

As Serbia faces an electricity shortage, Vučić has ignored European Union pleas for countries to reduce CO2 emissions and has even pledged to expand coal mining for power plants -- much to the frustration of environmentalists.
Serbia has moved a step closer to joining the European Union after opening talks on a series of environmental policies.

On Tuesday, Belgrade was permitted to begin discussions on climate change, energy, transport and trans-European infrastructure networks.

Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabić told reporters in Brussels that the move marks "a very important milestone for our European integration process".

But the EU has warned progress on its path to EU membership still depends on Serbia normalising relations with Kosovo.

Countries wanting to join the 27-member bloc must bring their laws and regulations in line with EU standards.

Hopefuls must achieve negotiations in 35 policy areas, from the free movement of workers to taxation, or agricultural and economic policy.

Serbia has now opened 22 negotiating policy areas since its membership talks began in 2014. Tuesday was also the first time Serbia has opened four "chapters" at once.
"Serbia is taking another very important step forward in joining the European Union," said EU Enlargement Commissioner Olivér Várhelyi.

But he added that relations with Kosovo -- Serbia's former territory -- and the rule of law "remain essential to the overall pace of accession talks".

"[It is] "crucial that Serbia continues to deliver results on the ground," Várhelyi said.

Serbia, supported by its allies Russia and China, has refused to recognise Kosovo's declaration of independence in 2008 -- as well as five current EU countries.
The European Union has pledged €9 billion for the Western Balkans as part of a new economic and investment plan but political divisions over the prospect of accession remain entrenched.

The new commitment comes as European leaders met in Brdo pri Kranju, Slovenia, for an EU-Western Balkans summit that was also attended by the heads of government of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Kosovo.

As of today, Albania, North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia are officially recognised as candidates to EU membership, while Bosnia and Kosovo are seen as potential applicants. Albania and North Macedonia are the most advanced of the group, but a dispute between Skopje and the current Bulgarian government has effectively blocked the process. The impasse has shed further light on the slow pace of EU accession.

Mindful that patience is wearing thin in the Balkans, Slovenia, the current holder of the EU's rotating presidency, convened the special summit in Brdo to directly address the question of enlargement. But not every member state shares Slovenia's appetite for welcoming new members in the 27-strong club.

The final communiqué of the high-level meeting simply reaffirms the EU's "unequivocal support for the European perspective of the Western Balkans" without any specific deadline or time limit, let alone any compromise from Bulgaria to break the deadlock.

"The European Union is not complete without the Western Balkans," said Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, adding that the "vast majority" of EU countries expressed their support for enlargement, "even the most sceptical ones", which she did not name.

The failure to open negotiations with North Macedonia and Albania is "jeopardising our standing and leverage in the region," von der Leyen remarked.

Standing next to her, Charles Michel, President of the European Council, underlined the strategic importance of the Western Balkans and the clear consensus around the leaders' table.

Both presidents, however, admitted that "key issues" like fundamental values, rule of law, justice, media freedom and the fight against corruption and organised crime remain roadblocks for accession. The leaders praised the reforms that the Balkan countries have so far undertaken in this regard but added the six nations still have work to do.

"In all frankness, there is an ongoing discussion among the 27 about our capacity to welcome new member states," said Michel.

In order to support reforms, EU leaders agreed to set up a new economic and investment plan for the Western Balkans to help the region improve its competitiveness and accelerate the green and digital transitions – in line with the EU's own agenda. The bloc has pledged €9 billion in grants, which Brussels says have the potential of mobilising up to €20 billion in investments.

The communiqué includes other commitments in the fields of climate action, connectivity, transport, market integration, research and innovation, as well as a roadmap to lower roaming charges between the EU and the Western Balkans.

The bloc also promises to provide the region with more anti-coronavirus vaccines, although without guaranteeing any specific number.

So far, the EU has delivered over 2.9 million shots and €3.3 billion in health and economic support against the pandemic.

Commitments to deepen cooperation are also made in the field of foreign policy and security, including disinformation, hybrid threats, migration, human trafficking, terrorism and radicalisation.

"We share the same history, the same interests and values," said von der Leyen. "I'm deeply convinced we also share the same destiny".

Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša, who hosted the summit, called the meeting a "milestone" and compared its significance to that of the 2003 Thessaloniki summit when the EU officially recognised the Western Balkans as potential candidates for EU membership.