Finally, it is important that we collect meaningful, systematic, and disaggregated data by race, age, gender, and class. Such data are useful not only for promoting public trust but for understanding the full impact of this pandemic and how different systems of inequality intersect, affecting the lived experiences of minority groups and beyond. It is also important that such data be made widely available, so as to enhance public awareness of the problem and inform interventions and public policies.

Conclusion

In 1966, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said, "Of all forms of inequality, injustice in health is the most shocking and inhuman."[41] More than 54 years later, African Americans still suffer from injustices that are at the basis of income and health disparities. We know from previous experiences that epidemics place increased demands on scarce resources and enormous stress on social and economic systems.

A deeper understanding of the social determinants of health in the context of the current crisis, and of the role that these factors play in mediating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on African Americans’ health outcomes, increases our awareness of the indivisibility of all human rights and the collective dimension of the right to health. We need a more explicit equity agenda that encompasses both formal and substantive equality.[42] Besides nondiscrimination and equality, participation and accountability are equally crucial.

Unfortunately, as suggested by the limited available data, African American communities and other minorities in the United States are bearing the brunt of the current pandemic. The COVID-19 crisis has served to unmask higher vulnerabilities and exposure among people of color. A thorough reflection on how to close this gap needs to start immediately. Given that the COVID-19 pandemic is more than just a health crisis—it is disrupting and affecting every aspect of life (including family life, education, finances, and agricultural production)—it requires a multisectoral approach. We need to build stronger partnerships among the health care sector and other social and economic sectors. Working collaboratively to address the many interconnected issues that have emerged or become visible during this pandemic—particularly as they affect marginalized and vulnerable populations—offers a more effective strategy.

Moreover, as Delan Devakumar et al. have noted:

the strength of a healthcare system is inseparable from the broader social systems that surround it. Health protection relies not only on a well-functioning health system with universal coverage, which the US could highly benefit from, but also on social inclusion, justice, and solidarity. In the absence of these factors, inequalities are magnified, and scapegoating persists, with discrimination remaining long after.[43]

This current public health crisis demonstrates that we are all interconnected and that our well-being is contingent on that of others. A renewed and healthy society is possible only if governments and public authorities commit to reducing vulnerability and the impact of ill-health by taking steps to respect, protect, and fulfill the right to health.[44] It requires that government and nongovernment actors establish policies and programs that promote the right to health in practice.[45] It calls for a shared commitment to justice and equality for all.

Maritza Vasquez Reyes, MA, LCSW, CCM, is a Ph.D. student and Research and Teaching Assistant at the UConn School of Social Work, University of Connecticut, Hartford, USA.


Please address correspondence to the author. Email: maritzavasquezreyes@uconn.edu.

Competing interests: None declared.

HEALTH AND EDUCATION IN THE MODERN WORLD
Education in the Developing World
"The opportunity for every child to learn and to make the most of their talents is at the heart of a fairer society. Yet in the country after country it is wealth, not talent, that dictates a child’s educational destiny.… This reality is failing individual children, each of whom has a right to education. It is also failing society, as a generation of talented poor girls and boys cannot fulfill their promise and contribute fully to human progress. Brilliant doctors, teachers, or entrepreneurs are instead herding goats or collecting water. Humanity faces unprecedented challenges. Yet instead of utilizing the talents of all of the people, inequality means we are squandering this potential."

Public Good or Private Wealth
Oxfam report for the 2019 World Economic Forum in Davos
Understanding the Numbers: Good News and Bad
More people in the world today are educated than ever before. In 1820 only 12% of the people in the world could read and write. Today the share is reversed: only 17% of the world’s population remains illiterate. Primary school enrollment is now almost universal in most countries, with as many girls enrolling as boys.

Nevertheless, these figures overshadow the impact of persistent inequity. Some 63 million children of primary school age were out of school in 2016 and progress on primary school enrollment remains flat. Most impacted are the world’s poorest countries, where the lack of basic education is a hard constraint on development. In Niger, for example, just 36.5% of 15- to 20-year-olds are literate.

Classroom in rural India
A small village private school in Dasdoi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Oxfam caught the world’s attention in 2014 with the astounding statistic that just 85 individuals had the same wealth as the 3.8 billion people who make up the poorest half of the world’s population. Three years later the number was down to 43, and in 2018 to just 26. In their annual report to the 2019 World Economic Forum in Davos, Public Good or Private Wealth, Oxfam takes a strong, unequivocal position: this spiraling inequity must be checked, and the way to do it is for all governments to provide universal health care, education and social protection, free at the point of delivery, funded by fair taxation of rich individuals and corporations. Governments, says Oxfam, must "Stop supporting privatization of public services."

"For some time, the view of institutions like the World Bank was that public services should be rationed and minimal and that the private sector is often a better provider. It was argued that individuals should pay for their schools and hospitals, market mechanisms should be used to organize services, and that social protection should be very limited and targeted only at the very poorest people. While some of the rhetoric, programming, and advice has changed, including notably from the IMF, change in practice has been slower. This trend is too often compounded by the influence of elites over politics and governments, skewing public spending in the wrong direction and ensuring that it benefits the already wealthy rather than those who need it most. It is time to focus on what works. To most effectively reduce the gap between rich and poor, public services need to be universal, free, public, accountable, and to work for women…

"The World Bank and some donor governments are upbeat about the possibility of public-private partnerships (PPPs) and private provision as alternatives to government-funded services. Yet research by Oxfam and other NGOs has shown clearly that education, health and other public services delivered privately and funded through PPPs are not a viable alternative to government delivery of services. Instead, they can drive up inequality and drain government revenues. Even the IMF is now warning of the sizeable fiscal risks of pursuing PPP approaches."

In such a situation, disability may be a substantial obstacle on the way to the professional development of individuals and to their career. On the other hand, often it is not the disability proper but the prejudice of employers that becomes an obstacle on the way of people with disabilities. However, such discrimination tends to disappear due to legal changes, including the introduction of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and current policies aiming at the inclusion of disabled people. In this regard, the discrimination of people with disabilities persists because the power of prejudices and biases is very strong.

At the same time, educators should be aware of special needs of students with disabilities. They should understand that students with disabilities are no different from other students but they have special needs, which educators should match to help them to succeed in their learning and reach a considerable academic progress just like other students do. In fact, students with disabilities are not inferior compared to their peers but they just have special needs. For example, some researchers (Mansell, 2003) admit that even children with serious mental disabilities may be integrated in the learning process successfully on the condition of meeting needs of those students but the problem is that educators are not trained to work with such students. This is why they have difficulties while working with students with disabilities and the integration of students into the learning process and into their peer groups becomes quite difficult.

On the other hand, the modern education focuses on such issues as Knowledge, Enquiry, Empathy, Pluralism, Social Commitment to prevent the problem of discrimination of students with disabilities and to set educators free from their biases and prejudices in relation to students with disabilities. Knowledge is essential for educators to understand needs of students with disabilities. The enquiry is essential for the research of latest advancements in the field of education and exploration of the problem of disability. The empathy is essential for educators to treat students with disabilities, which educators should treat on the equal ground compared to other students. The pluralism is essential for educators to develop the personalized approach to each students, regardless of their abilities and disabilities. The social commitment is essential for educators to treat students with disabilities as an integral part of the school community. The social commitment means that educators should serve to interests of the community and help students with disabilities to integrate into their communities and help communities to accept children with disabilities as equal community members.

At the same time, there is another issue related to abilities, which often remains unnoticed by educators and researchers, which is the issue of excessive abilities. What is meant here is the fact that some students are gifted in certain fields, which make them different from other students and, to a certain extent, put them in the position similar to the position of students with disabilities (Enns, 2013). Excessive abilities lead to the focus of students on the specific subject, which is particularly interesting for them and where they are particularly successful. For example, gifted students may be successful in math that will put them in quite a challenging position. On the one hand, conventional math classes will be boring for them because instructions educators provide for other students may be not even necessary for gifted students, who understand those instructions perfectly and know more than other students, while their math skills may match standards which are normally attributed to higher grades. As a result, such students feel bored with the classroom environment and the learning process because math classes are not interesting for them because they do not contribute to their progress that discourages them from paying much attention to their math class. This trend can be traced in relation to other subjects, which gifted students may be particularly strong in.

On the other hand, gifted students may have difficulties with developing positive interpersonal relations with their peers. In fact, peers may feel the difference of gifted students because of their excessive abilities that may lead to the development of the sense of inferiority-superiority in relationships between the average and gifted students. In addition, gifted students may stay too focused on their favorite subjects or particular interests that also prevent them from developing positive interpersonal relations with other students. In such a way, students with excessive abilities have difficulties with building up positive interpersonal relationships with other students just like students with disabilities.

Thus, the concept of ability/disability turns out to be pivotal for the modern education system and society at large because it influences consistently the development of students and position of individuals with disabilities and excessive abilities. In this regard, disability and excessive ability are two extremes which may raise problems in the personal and professional development of individuals because they face the risk of the development of poor interpersonal relations with their peers. At the same time, both students with disabilities and excessive abilities need the integration into their classroom environment and development of positive interpersonal relationships with their peers.


On the other hand, there are many examples of developing countries successfully expanding access by providing universal free education:

In Uganda, removing direct costs through universal primary education increased enrollment by over 60 percent and significantly lowered cost-related dropouts.
In Malawi, free primary education increased enrollment by half, favoring girls and poor people.
In Ghana, in September 2017, after fees for senior high (upper secondary) school were dropped, 90,000 more students walked through the school doors at the start of the new academic year.
Sierra Leone’s government has made primary and secondary education free and is increasing tax collection from the richest.
Ethiopia is a poor country, with around the same per capita income as Canada’s in 1840. And yet it is the fifth-largest spender on education in the world as a proportion of its budget, employing over 400,000 primary school teachers. Between 2005 and 2015, it brought 15 million more children into school. Ethiopia still faces serious challenges with learning outcomes and improving the quality of education, but as Oxfam reports, "the scale of its commitment and effort to educate its girls and boys is dramatic."
Education for All—Starting with Women
Achieving greater equality between women and men and increased empowerment of women and girls have long been recognized as a global imperative for development. In 2015 it was made a stand-alone goal in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (SDG5).

Girl's classroom in Afghanistan
Goal #5 of The Global Resolutions Initiative: "Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls." 2018 progress update.
Education is key to meeting that goal, and there has been real progress. Globally, 90% of girls now complete primary school, but only 75% complete their lower secondary education. In low-income countries, the situation is less encouraging: fewer than 67% of girls complete their primary education, and only 33% complete lower secondary school. Income and gender combine for a crushing result. According to Oxfam, in Kenya, a girl from a poor family has a one in 250 chance of pursuing her studies beyond secondary school, compared to a one in three chance for a boy from a rich family.

A 2019 OECD global report points out that "Despite increasing investment in efforts to reduce gender gaps and empower women over the last 25 years, at the current rate of progress it will still require over 200 years to achieve SDG 5, which is the equivalent to nine generations."

With even a few years of primary education, women’s economic prospects improve; they have fewer and healthier children and better chances of sending their children to school.
The World Bank calculates that this failure to educate girls costs the world economy as much as $30 trillion in lost earnings and productivity. It also comes at a high cost to their health and well-being. Globally, women with secondary education earn twice as much as women with no education. Education not only narrows the pay gap with men, it also increases their self-confidence and decision-making power in the household. Women typically invest a higher proportion of their earnings in their families and communities than do men. With even a few years of primary education, women’s economic prospects improve; they have fewer and healthier children and better chances of sending their children to school. UNESCO estimates that if all girls were to receive secondary education, there would be a 64% reduction in early and forced child marriages which greatly increase the risk of death in childbirth. If all girls completed even primary education, an estimated 189,000 maternal deaths would be avoided annually – a reduction of two-thirds.Regrettably, cultural norms and the misinterpretation of religious concepts have too often led to violence against women of all ages, and present a major deterrent to girls’ education. Honor killings, abduction, rape, and sexual harassment still occur with near impunity in too many countries. As the Oxfam report points out, public education can be truly transformative for girls and women when schools are used as spaces to challenge the attitudes of parents and communities that act as barriers to gender equality. But as evident from the Pakistan example, "school fees can stop children going to school, and especially girls. Women and girls lose out the most when fees are charged for public services: in many societies, their low social status and lack of control over finances means they are last in line to benefit from education or medical care."

Schooling Is Not the Same as Learning
According to World Bank’s 2018 report, Learning to Realize Education’s Promise, the rise in school enrollment does not mean that all those children are getting a good education. Globally, 125 million children are not acquiring functional literacy or numeracy, even after four years in school. "Rabia Nura, a 16-year-old girl from Kano in northern Nigeria, goes to school despite ever-present threats from Boko Haram. She is determined to become a doctor. But 37 million African children will learn so little in school that they will not be much better off than kids who never attend school."

In low-income countries, chronic malnutrition, disease, and chaotic or violent environments undermine children’s early development.
Poverty/inequity is certainly a factor, both between and within countries. In low-income countries, the average student performs worse than 95% of the students from wealthier OECD countries. In South Africa, third graders from the poorest households are three years behind those from the richest households.

Many factors compromise school effectiveness in low-income countries. Chronic malnutrition, disease, and chaotic or violent environments undermine children’s early development. High-quality teachers—in fact, all teachers—are in short supply. School management is often weak, and the availability of resources can’t always keep pace with fast-rising enrollments.

But as both Oxfam and World Bank point out, lower learning levels are not an inevitable result of either rapidly expanding enrollment or poverty. South Korea and Vietnam are examples of countries that have achieved excellent across-the-board learning in the midst of rapid expansion. These countries, like all of the world’s best performing school systems, "manage to provide high-quality education to all students rather than only to students from privileged groups." Good schools make a big difference.

What Should the Poor Expect from Education?
School under a bridge
Indian children attend a school run under a bridge in India.The poor in the developing world and those stranded in refugee camps across the world know what they want for their children. Almost all of them recognize that a good education is a key to providing a better future for their children and improving their own quality of life.

First and foremost, education needs to prepare young people so that they and their community can get out of poverty. Education in all communities, especially in the developing world, needs to involve parents, students, and teachers and address the needs of the local community first, and then society at large. The subjects taught would then be relevant to learners. It’s not as if children lack the potential to change their world for the better. They are, as it were, waiting for the opportunities to expand their natural ability to create, learn and problem solve.

In Redefining Education in the Developing World, Marc J. Epstein and Kristi Yuthas contend that the very idea of what constitutes quality education for students in the developing world must change. Government agencies and other organizations, they say, should shift the focus from test scores and mastery of traditional curriculum to helping students develop knowledge and skills that are relevant to their lives and can lift them and their communities out of poverty. It’s time, they write, "to seek out the interventions that lead to the greatest social and economic impact for the poor."