BERLIN — The outgoing German government and the leaders of the country's 16 states are planning to tighten pandemic rules, according to a draft document seen by POLITICO.

According to the plan which is set to be adopted Thursday, only those fully vaccinated and those who have recovered from COVID-19 will have access to venues such as theaters, cinemas and restaurants, which may ask guests to show a negative test if they see fit. Moreover, private gatherings that include unvaccinated people or people who haven't recently recovered from COVID-19 can no longer exceed one household and a maximum of two individuals from a different household.

The stricter measures are to come as Germany continues to grapple with its fourth wave of coronavirus cases that has already overwhelmed hospital intensive care units in some regions and forced patients to be transferred out for treatment. On Wednesday, health authorities reported 67,186 new infections and 446 deaths from COVID-19.

Scientists have urged stricter restrictions for weeks, but decision-making in Berlin has been hampered because Germany is between governments. That has left lame-duck Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose conservatives lost a September general election, stuck an awkward "cohabitation" with her current finance minister and prospective successor Olaf Scholz, who is expected only to be confirmed in office next week at the head of a centre-left coalition.

Big events will also be subject to restrictions, meaning that the number of spectators must no longer exceed 5,000 indoors and 10,000 outdoors. Further rules will apply when fewer people are present, depending on the seating capacity of a venue. Regardless of the number of viewers, however, only the vaccinated and recovered will be able to attend big events.

In areas with more than 350 new infections per 100,000 people over seven days, indoor nightclubs will have to close and in schools the wearing of face masks will be mandatory for students of all age groups. The current nationwide weekly incidence is 443 cases per 100,000 people.

To get more Germans vaccinated, the federal government is also preparing to introduce mandatory vaccination in areas with particularly vulnerable people, while a general vaccine mandate will be voted on by parliament "in the near future." According to the document, the government and the states will work to offer first and second vaccine doses and booster shots to everyone who requires them by Christmas.

Finally, an expert council of scientists will be set up in the chancellery and will convene on a weekly basis to make further suggestions for pandemic containment — confirming a pledge by Scholz last week when he announced a deal to form a government between his Social Democrats, the Greens and the liberal Free Democrats.
Cancer screening for instance was cut back dramatically in many countries. In the U.K. for example, for every week of quarantine, 2,300 cancer cases were estimated to go undiagnosed. And in low- and middle-income countries, where levels of undiagnosed NCDs are already very high, this is likely to trigger serious long-term public health consequences and a tide of avoidable deaths from NCDs.

A 2021 WHO survey also showed that 50-60 percent of countries experienced disruptions to cardiovascular emergency services, diabetes management, and cancer treatment and screening.

50-60 percent of countries experienced disruptions to cardiovascular emergency services, diabetes management, and cancer treatment and screening.

Two years into the pandemic, there have been over a quarter of a billion recorded cases of the virus and over five million deaths. The majority of these deaths were among older people and people living with chronic conditions like hypertension, obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The pandemic cruelly exposed just how costly the ongoing failure to adequately fund and sustain an effective global response to NCDs has been — and not for the first time: chronic conditions greatly increased the risk  of severe symptoms from the coronaviruses that caused Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and they will potentially do so in future pandemics too.

It’s clear that we need to fix what’s broken, but fix it more sturdily. Building back better will mean investing in more resilient health systems, recognizing that the NCD response and pandemic preparedness are two sides of the same coin.

Governments and public health authorities have a role in keeping populations healthier and better preparing for future threats. National plans for pandemic response, recovery and preparedness need to guarantee continuity of care for those people who live with NCDs or an infectious disease like HIV or TB.

The health community has demonstrated during the COVID-19 pandemic that innovations can reduce disruptions to health systems by reducing the burden on them. Telehealth consultations, home visits by community health workers, delivery of medicines and support for self-care are all good examples. They can free up resources without compromising care, so it makes good sense that they become a permanent mode of health delivery more broadly speaking. They also aid the collection of better data and patient records, needed for improving care.

The pandemic cruelly exposed just how costly the ongoing failure to adequately fund and sustain an effective global response to NCDs has been.

COVID-19 has been a perfect storm of infectious disease meeting NCDs head on. It reiterates how important an integrated approach to health will be going forward, which means dismantling the arbitrary nature of disease-specific silos in global health programs, funding and national health systems.

The reality today is that ever more people are living with multiple chronic conditions. People living with HIV have a significantly higher risk of cardiovascular disease and some cancers. People living with TB are much more susceptible to diabetes and vice versa.  Hypertensive disorders and gestational diabetes affect many pregnancies, risking potential lifelong health impacts for both mother and child if not treated. Better integrated primary care is the answer.

Large-scale community screenings can close the diagnosis gap for common NCDs such as hypertension, diabetes and mental health conditions, as well as communicable conditions such as tuberculosis or rheumatic fever. They can also be used to raise awareness among people about NCDs.

Around half of NCDs are preventable, if interventions are taken to reduce key risk factors:  tobacco and alcohol use, air pollution, physical inactivity and consumption of unhealthy foods are obvious examples. Equally clear is that the burden of NCDs disproportionately and inequitably falls on poorer people and marginalized groups. Meaningful pandemic preparedness will be largely a proactive effort by political leaders to protect the disadvantaged. It’s essential too, that civil society representatives and people living with NCDs have a seat at the policy table for decisions being made about their lives.

Equally clear is that the burden of NCDs disproportionately and inequitably falls on poorer people and marginalized groups.

The pandemic has already catalyzed important policy changes in some countries, with the introduction of front-of-pack warning labels for unhealthy foods, supporting active mobility in cities, levying higher taxes on tobacco and sugary drinks, bans on advertising and selling junk food in schools, and measures to reduce air pollution.